Assessing the reliability of an automated method for measuring dominance hierarchy in non-human primates.

Among animal societies, dominance is an important social factor that influences inter-individual
relationships. However, assessing dominance hierarchy can be a time-consuming activity which is
potentially impeded by environmental factors, difficulties in the recognition of animals, or
disturbance of animals during data collection. Here we took advantage of novel devices, machines for
automated learning and testing (MALT), designed primarily to study non-human primate cognition, to
additionally measure the dominance hierarchy of a semi-free-ranging primate group. When working on a
MALT, an animal can be replaced by another, which could reflect an asymmetric dominance
relationship. To assess the reliability of our method, we analysed a sample of the automated
conflicts with video scoring and found that 74% of these replacements included genuine forms of
social displacements. In 10% of the cases, we did not identify social interactions and in the
remaining 16% we observed affiliative contacts between the monkeys. We analysed months of daily use
of MALT by up to 26 semi-free-ranging Tonkean macaques (Macaca tonkeana) and found that dominance
relationships inferred from these interactions strongly correlated with the ones derived from
observations of spontaneous agonistic interactions collected during the same time period. An
optional filtering procedure designed to exclude chance-driven displacements or affiliative contacts
suggests that the presence of 26% of these interactions in data sets did not impair the reliability
of this new method. We demonstrate that this method can be used to assess the dynamics of both
individual social status, and group-wide hierarchical stability longitudinally with minimal research
labour. Further, it facilitates a continuous assessment of dominance hierarchies in captive groups,
even during unpredictable environmental or challenging social events, which underlines the
usefulness of this method for group management purposes. Altogether, this study supports the use of
MALT as a reliable tool to automatically and dynamically assess dominance hierarchy within captive
groups of non-human primates, including juveniles, under conditions in which such technology can be
used.