Effects of social tolerance on stress: hair cortisol concentrations in the tolerant Tonkean macaques (Macaca tonkeana) and the despotic long-tailed macaques (Macaca fascicularis).

Group living is a source of stress and an individuals' social environment has been shown to have a
significant effect on its health and well-being. However, little is known about how different social
organizations affect the stress levels of their members. Is living in a hierarchical society more or
less stressful than living in a more tolerant structure? Here, we assess cortisol concentrations in
the hair of two macaque species with radically different dominance styles: the egalitarian Tonkean
macaque (Macaca Tonkeana) and the despotic long-tailed macaques (Macaca fascicularis). Hair was
sampled in winter and again in late spring in two mixed-sex groups of 22 Tonkean macaques and 9
long-tailed macaques; Hair cortisol concentrations were significantly higher in the egalitarian
Tonkean macaques than in the despotic long-tailed macaques, ranging from 161.13 to 938.8 pg/mg (mean
± SD 349.67 ± 126.22) and from 134.46 to 339.86 pg/mg (mean ± SD 231.2 ± 44.24), respectively. There
was no difference between male and female cortisol concentrations, but hair cortisol increased with
age in males. Dominance rank certainty was lower among female Tonkean macaques compared to long-
tailed macaques. Our results suggest that species differences in dominance styles may translate into
differences in long-term cortisol concentrations. We suggest that the higher cortisol concentrations
in Tonkean macaques could be linked to the instability and lack of predictability and control around
social relationships. LAY SUMMARYBeing part of a social group can be very stressful, depending on
the social structure of this group. We found that the more socially tolerant Tonkean macaques
exhibited on average higher hair cortisol concentrations than more despotic long-tailed macaques.
Males and females exhibited similar concentrations of hair cortisol in both species, but in male
Tonkean macaques concentrations increased with age. The finding that overall cortisol levels were
higher in the more tolerant species suggests that psychological arousal due to unpredictable social
relations and mating competition may be an important driver of cortisol release in this species
despite its overall tolerant social organization.