Characterization of five environmental phages infecting Escherichia coli K-12 isolated during a phage biology training course.

Phage collections are essential tools for discovering and dissecting bacterial anti-phage defense
systems. Here, we report the isolation, characterization, and annotated genome sequences of five
environmental Escherichia coli-infecting phages, obtained during the 2023 Fundamentals of Basic and
Applied Phage Biology course at Lund University. The phages were isolated using a motile E. coli
K-12 BW25113 strain, whose motility is conferred by an IS5 insertion upstream of the flhDC operon,
the master regulator of flagellar synthesis. The isolated Escherichia phages include Lubas (LuPh1)
and Lucat (LuPh2) of the genus Tequatrovirus; Lupin (LuPh3) and Lucris (LuPh4) of the genus
Tequintavirus; and Kompetensportalen (LuPh5) of the genus Chivirus. Transmission electron microscopy
confirmed myovirus and siphovirus morphologies typical of these genera. Consistent with its
classification in the flagellotropic Chivirus genus, LuPh5 did not infect a poorly motile BW25113
strain lacking the IS5 element upstream of flhDC, but did infect the motile laboratory Salmonella
enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium strain 12023s. By testing a panel of eight previously
described anti-phage defense systems, we found that LuPh1 and LuPh2 are inhibited by the toxin-
antitoxin-chaperone CmdTAC system; LuPh5 is inhibited by both the restriction-modification system
EcoRI and the abortive infection reverse transcriptase AbiK; and all five phages are sensitive to
the hybrid artificial CmdTA-HigC system. Collectively, our findings expand the toolkit for probing
phage-host interactions and underscore the pedagogical value of incorporating phage isolation into
practical training for emerging researchers.IMPORTANCEBacterial anti-phage defense systems are
central to microbiology and have applications in biotechnology and medicine. Phage collections are
key tools for uncovering and studying these systems. By isolating and characterizing five E. coli
K12-infecting phages, including three newly identified species, this work expands resources for
probing phage-host interactions. It also shows that hands-on phage isolation in educational settings
can contribute meaningfully to both training and research.