A cofactor-pathway-process engineering strategy enables ultra-high 2-hydroxyphenazine production in Pseudomonas chlororaphis.

The take-all disease of wheat poses a significant threat to global food security, underscoring the
need for effective biocontrol agents. 2-Hydroxyphenazine (2-OH-PHZ) shows superior antifungal
activity against the take-all disease of wheat pathogen over the commercial biopesticide
phenazine-1-carboxylic acid (PCA). However, the biosynthetic production of 2-OH-PHZ is constrained
by three critical limitations: the low hydroxylation efficiency of the flavin-dependent
monooxygenase PhzO, inadequate intracellular supply of the precursor PCA, and the long fermentation
process. To systematically address these interconnected challenges, we developed and implemented a
Cofactor-Pathway-Process (CPP) engineering strategy in Pseudomonas chlororaphis LX24. First,
cofactor engineering was employed to enhance PhzO activity by improving the supply of FADH2 and
NADPH, which increased the hydroxylation efficiency from 22% to over 85%. Subsequently, pathway
optimization was applied to overcome the precursor limitation by enhancing phenazine biosynthesis,
which resulted in a 2.18-fold increase in 2-OH-PHZ accumulation to 988.25 mg/L. Combined with medium
optimization and phzO overexpression, the titer of 2-OH-PHZ reached 2,291.56 mg/L in shake flasks
and 2,663.12 mg/L in a 5-L bioreactor within 144 h, which is the highest production reported to
date. Finally, a two-stage temperature-shift fermentation process was introduced to accelerate the
decarboxylation of the intermediate 2-hydroxyphenazine-1-carboxylic acid, reducing the total
fermentation time by 39 h and significantly improving process efficiency and sustainability. In
summary, the integrated CPP strategy successfully overcomes multiple bottlenecks in 2-OH-PHZ
biosynthesis, culminating in record-high productivity and underscoring its value as a versatile
blueprint for the sustainable bioproduction of phenazine derivatives and other high-value natural
products.