Whole-genome sequencing to investigate the prevalence and transmission of multidrug-resistant Gram-negative pathogens in an adult intensive care unit in the UK.

Background. Rates of multidrug resistance (MDR) in Gram-negative bacteria (GNB), particularly those
harbouring extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBL) and/or carbapenemases, are increasing globally.
Intensive care unit (ICU) patients are vulnerable to healthcare-associated infection (HCAI).
Surveillance for carriage of multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria (MDR GNB) is inconsistent,
with differing practices amongst ICUs, hospitals and countries. Furthermore, the impact of
asymptomatic carriage on HCAI rates is unclear.Methods. We conducted a 6-month prospective
surveillance study of MDR GNB in a UK adult ICU. Screening samples were collected from all study
participants on admission, once a week (depending on length of stay) and on discharge from the ICU.
Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) was used to examine the population structure and antimicrobial
resistance mechanisms of MDR GNB and to determine evidence of recent transmission between
patients.Findings. Of 424 participants recruited between June and December 2016, 15% (n=64) were
positive for MDR GNB during admission screening to the ICU. The most frequently identified organisms
were Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae. In total, 10% (n=42) of
patients acquired an ESBL-producing or carbapenem-resistant MDR GNB during their ICU admission. WGS
of the bacterial populations reflected national trends. An undetected outbreak of carbapenemase-
producing K. pneumoniae, which had spread to several wards, was identified and controlled. Most
positive patients carried identical lineages across multiple body sites.Interpretation. Our findings
suggest that prospective screening for MDR GNB in ICU patients could be beneficial and be considered
in other UK critical care settings. This would not only improve early detection but also enable the
prompt institution of enhanced infection control measures.