
JOURNAL INFORMATION
==============================
NLM Title Abbreviation: Protein Sci
Journal ID: Protein Sci
Journal ID: PRO

Protein Science : A Publication of the Protein Society

ISSN: 0961-8368
EISSN: 1469-896X
Publisher: Wiley

ARTICLE INFORMATION
==============================
PMCID: PMC13114773
PMID: 42043279
DOI: 10.1002/pro.70582
Article ID: PRO70582
Article version: 1
Subjects: Research Article, Research Article

ssRNA bacteriophage metagenomes reveal a diverse set of novel protein families

Rūmnieks et al.

Rūmnieks Jānis 1
Baltā Ieva 1
Šišovs Mihails https://orcid.org/0009-0003-8512-5389 1
Tārs Kaspars 1 2 kaspars.tars@biomed.lu.lv

1 Biomedical Research and Study Center Riga Latvia
2 Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences University of Latvia Riga Latvia
* Correspondence
Kaspars Tārs, Biomedical Research and Study Center, Ratsupites 1, k‐1, LV‐1067 Riga, Latvia.
Email: kaspars.tars@biomed.lu.lv

Electronic publication date: 2026 Apr 27
Publication date: 2026 May
Volume: 35
Electronic Location ID: e70582
Revised 2026 Mar 17; Received 2025 Dec 19; Accepted 2026 Apr 13
Copyright: © 2026 The Author(s). Protein Science published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of The Protein Society.
License: This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.
License URL: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Keywords: leviviricetes, open reading frames,  metagenomes,  ssRNA bacteriophages

Funding: European Commission 10.13039/501100000780 5.2.1.1.i.0/2/24/I/CFLA/001
Figure count: 6
Table count: 2
Page count: 16

source-schema-version-number: 2.0
cover-date: May 2026
details-of-publishers-convertor: Converter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.7.6 mode:remove_FC converted:27.04.2026

Rūmnieks J , Baltā I , Šišovs M , Tārs K . ssRNA bacteriophage metagenomes reveal a diverse set of novel protein families. Protein Science. 2026;35(5):e70582. 10.1002/pro.70582

Review Editor: Aitziber L. Cortajarena

==============================
Abstract

The bacteriophages with single‐stranded RNA (ssRNA) genomes (class Leviviricetes) are among the simplest known viruses that encode only three core proteins: a receptor‐binding protein, a capsid protein, and an RNA‐dependent RNA polymerase. The number of isolated ssRNA phages has remained very low, but the accumulating RNA metagenome data have uncovered a large variety of these viruses in many environments. Besides the core proteins, many of these genomes putatively encode additional proteins, which up to now have remained uncharacterized. We looked for non‐conserved open reading frames (ORFs) in Leviviricetes sequences from the IMG/VR virus metagenome database and used sequence‐ and structure‐based clustering to organize them into similarity groups. Potential ORFs were found throughout the ssRNA phage genomes but almost exclusively on the positive‐sense RNA strand, suggestive of their protein‐coding potential. The prevalence of the non‐conserved ORFs varied in various phage lineages, and their distribution among different genome positions was markedly uneven. Most of the identified ORFs encode all‐α proteins, a portion of which contain transmembrane segments that resemble a group of known ssRNA phage lysis proteins, while many others represent previously uncharacterized families of globular or semi‐globular α‐helical proteins. We additionally uncovered a major class of globular α/β proteins and experimentally determined the structure of a representative protein of this group. These results pave the way for further functional studies of novel ssRNA phage proteins for a better understanding of this diverse virus group.

1 INTRODUCTION

Bacteriophages of the Leviviricetes class are small viruses with single‐stranded, positive‐sense RNA genomes. Their approximately 4000‐nucleotide‐long genomic RNAs encode only three core proteins: the coat protein (CP) which forms an icosahedral shell around the RNA genome, the maturation protein (MP), a minor virion component responsible for attaching the virion to bacterial pili, the cellular receptor of the phage, and the RNA‐dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) which replicates the viral genome (Pumpens, 2020). To escape the host bacterium at the end of the infection cycle, many of the studied single‐stranded RNA (ssRNA) phages encode an additional lysis protein (LP), which is usually a small polypeptide with one or two transmembrane helices and sometimes an additional unstructured N‐terminal segment (Antillon et al., 2024). The LPs operate through at least two unrelated mechanisms: the LP from ssRNA phage M inhibits MurJ, a transmembrane protein which normally translocates the peptidoglycan precursor lipid II across the membrane (Chamakura et al., 2017; Kohga et al., 2025), while the LP from phage MS2 oligomerizes into pores which are believed to trigger membrane depolarization and activation of bacterial autolysins that degrade the peptidoglycan (Goessens et al., 1988; Mezhyrova et al., 2023; Walderich et al., 1988). In contrast to the core genome where the MP, CP and RdRp genes are present always in that order even in very distantly related ssRNA phages, the location of lysis genes is much more diverse: some of the LP‐encoding open reading frames (ORFs) partially overlap with the coat and replicase genes (Beremand & Blumenthal, 1979; Kannoly et al., 2012; Olsthoorn et al., 1995) while others are completely embedded within the RdRp coding sequence (Kazaks et al., 2011; Rumnieks & Tars, 2012) or precede the MP gene (Klovins et al., 2002). Notably, not all ssRNA phages encode a separate LP: in viruses of the Qubevirus genus, the MP has acquired an additional function of binding to the MurA protein of the peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway which leads to depletion of building blocks for cell wall synthesis and subsequent bacterial lysis (Bernhardt et al., 2001; Karnik & Billeter, 1983). Interestingly, the qubeviruses have also evolved an elongated variant of the CP called A1 which has an additional C‐terminal domain produced through ribosomal read‐through of the termination codon of the coat gene (Weiner & Weber, 1971). A few copies of the A1 protein are incorporated in the capsid and are required for infectivity of the particles (Hofstetter et al., 1974) but their precise function is not currently known.

Compared to the tailed DNA bacteriophages, the number of isolated ssRNA phages has remained extremely low, raising questions of how well the small subset of cultured phages represents the true diversity of these viruses in nature. The influx of RNA metagenome data over the past decade has indeed uncovered a vast array of these viruses in virtually all environments where bacteria are thriving (Callanan et al., 2020; Krishnamurthy et al., 2016; Neri et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2016; Starr et al., 2019). The discovered metagenome sequences far exceeded the previously known ssRNA phage diversity and led to a complete reorganization of their taxonomy which, compared to the prior single family and two genera, now includes the Leviviricetes class with two orders, six families, 732 genera, and 2540 species (Callanan et al., 2021). The metagenome data have additionally enabled the “resurrection” of phage proteins by gene synthesis and heterologous expression, which has allowed determination of the capsid structure of uncultured ssRNA phages (Rumnieks et al., 2020) or characterization of new lysis proteins in the laboratory (Chamakura et al., 2020). The metagenome studies further suggested that besides the recognizable conserved proteins, a considerable number of additional ORFs are present in ssRNA phage genomes (Callanan et al., 2020), but these proteins up to now have remained unexplored. Therefore, in this study we have conducted a comprehensive search for such non‐conserved ORFs in uncultivated ssRNA phage genomes, examined the occurrence and distribution of these proteins in various phage lineages, and characterized the main features of the largest protein groups.

2 RESULTS

2.1 Non‐conserved ORFs in ssRNA phage genomes

We used IMG/VR, an extensive database of uncultivated virus genomes (Camargo et al., 2023), to source over 94,000 environmental Leviviricetes sequences for identification of previously uncharacterized ssRNA bacteriophage proteins. We extracted ORFs of 50 residues or longer from these genomes and used profile hidden Markov models (pHMMs) to detect the conserved MP, CP, and RdRp proteins among the ORFs. We then filtered a high‐quality subset of 23,063 near‐complete genome sequences in which we looked for ORFs that had not been recognized by any of the conserved protein pHMMs. We found that 8298, or 36%, of these genomes encode at least one complete ORF which has no detectable similarity to any of the conserved proteins; of these, 78% contain a single additional ORF and a further 20% have two extra ORFs, but it is exceedingly rare to find three or four (1.9% and 0.04%, respectively).

Most of the non‐conserved ssRNA phage ORFs encode short polypeptides around 60–90 residues in length, although there is a sizeable proportion also of longer, 100 to 200 residue proteins (Figure 1, left). The additional ORFs are found at every possible genomic location, both between the conserved genes and toward the terminal regions. To refer to the position of these ORFs, we follow a previously used convention (Callanan et al., 2020) in which ORFs preceding the MP coding sequence are designated “Alpha,” the ones between the CP and RdRp are called “Beta,” while those after the RdRp gene toward the 3′ end of the genome are labeled “Gamma.” In addition, we defined a “Delta” position for ORFs which are located between the MP and CP genes, and we also took into consideration potential protein‐coding sequences predicted anywhere on the complementary strand of the genome, referred to as “Antisense” ORFs (Figure 2). The distribution of ORFs among these positions is markedly uneven: the “Alpha” and “Beta” sites are by far the most frequent, each hosting approximately 45% of the proteins, while all other positions combined account for less than 10% of the ORFs. Each of the genome positions can harbor more than a single ORF, with the “Beta” position containing up to three and the “Alpha” site up to four consecutive ORFs in a few rare cases. Only 3.5% of the ORFs were found on the complementary strand, consistent with the expected location of protein‐coding sequences in positive‐sense RNA viruses.

FIGURE 1 Occurrence of non‐conserved ORFs in different ssRNA phage taxons. Left, histogram of the length distribution of the ORFs; right, fraction of genomes from different taxons with at least one non‐conserved ORF.

FIGURE 2 Genomic location of non‐conserved ORFs in ssRNA phage metagenomes. The archetypical Leviviricetes core genome with the MP, CP, and RdRp genes is shown with the non‐conserved ORF locations and their numbers at the different genome positions indicated. Top left, distribution of ORFs among the various sites.

The occurrence and distribution of the non‐conserved ORFs is notably different in various ssRNA phage lineages. The total number of sequences from the two orders, Norzivirales and Timlovirales, was similar in the starting near‐complete genome dataset; however, the additional ORFs were found in about 43% of Norzivirales but only 29% of Timlovirales phages; the differences are even more pronounced at the family level as the non‐conserved ORFs were identified in 60% of Atkinsviridae but only 20% of Blumeviridae genomes (Figure 1, right). There are also marked family‐level differences of the preferred genomic location of the additional ORFs: 71% of the extra ORFs in Fiersviridae genomes occupy the “Alpha” position, while in Steitzviridae phages, 83% of the ORFs are in the “Beta” position and less than 7% are at “Alpha.” In addition, Steitzviridae genomes are clearly skewed toward shorter ORFs while the longer proteins, particularly those exceeding 130 residues in length, are almost exclusively found in Norzivirales genomes (Figure 1, left).

2.2 Similarity groups of the non‐conserved ORFs

We used all‐against‐all sequence comparison and similarity score‐based clustering to organize a non‐redundant (less than 95% sequence‐identical) subset of the non‐conserved ORFs into sequence similarity groups. We additionally predicted the three‐dimensional structures of the proteins, performed an all‐against‐all structure similarity search, and clustered the ORFs based on structural similarity scores. We then merged the sequence and structural similarity groups, which resulted in 2281 clusters with the largest containing 132 proteins. Still, half of the proteins remained singletons and a further 11.5% of the sequences ended up in clusters containing only two sequences each, indicating a very high variability among the non‐conserved ssRNA phage ORFs (Figure 3, top left).

FIGURE 3 Clustering of the non‐conserved ORFs found in ssRNA phage metagenomes. Top left, the proportion of ORFs in clusters of a particular size. Clusters of six or more proteins which were used for further analysis are shown in a yellow‐brown color scale. Top right, contribution of sequence and structural similarity for defining the clusters. The bar heights correspond to the number of ORFs in the cluster, however, the shading indicates the fraction of detected sequence and/or structural similarity among the constituent protein pairs. Middle, evolutionary context of the non‐conserved ORFs. A phylogenetic tree of RdRp sequences is shown to the left with the position of model phages indicated, and a scatter plot in which the markers represent individual proteins and their vertical position corresponds to the position of the respective phage in the tree is presented to the right. The currently recognized ssRNA phage families are highlighted. Bottom, network‐type visualization of the clusters. The clusters are presented sequentially left‐to‐right and top‐to‐bottom, the nodes are colored by the genome position from which the ORFs originate.

For further analysis, we focused on similarity groups with at least six proteins, which together comprise 51 clusters with a total of 1063, or 28%, of the non‐redundant ORFs. We visualize the clusters as networks in which each node corresponds to a protein and an edge connecting two nodes represents detected similarity between the two proteins (Figure 3, bottom). To assess the support for each cluster, we compared the number of protein–protein pairs with detected similarity within the cluster to the total number of possible protein–protein pairs in a cluster of that size; this ratio varies from 0.14 (least supported, Cluster 17) to 1.0 (best supported, Clusters 21, 24, 34, 40, 42, 47, and 50) which clearly correlates with the apparent compactness of the networks. The amount of the detected sequence or structural similarity within different clusters is variable (Figure 3, top right): clusters of some of the shorter proteins are based entirely on sequence similarity (e.g., Cluster 2), some are identified almost solely on 3D‐structural resemblances (Cluster 35), while some are well supported by both types of similarity (Cluster 16).

To see in which phage lineages each of the non‐conserved protein groups is found, we reconstructed a phylogenetic tree of the phages and mapped the clusters to the tree (Figure 3, middle). Expectedly, clusters with strong sequence similarity among most proteins, such as Clusters 5 or 15, map to isolated and relatively narrow clades whereas clusters based on structural similarity, such as Clusters 1 or 4, tend to have a much broader distribution, often spanning multiple phage families. In a few cases, such as in Cluster 17 or 36, the ORFs appear to be almost universally distributed throughout both phage orders, but the low amount of shared similarity among the proteins casts doubt that all ORFs within those clusters are indeed homologous. When mapped to the tree, the non‐uniform distribution of the ORFs with regard to their genomic location is particularly evident: “Alpha”‐dominated clusters are almost exclusively found in Norzivirales while all of the major “Beta” clusters are found in different Steitzviridae lineages; both “Gamma” clusters also originate from Steitzviridae phages while the two homogeneous “Delta” clusters 16 and 24 both map to the Atkinsviridae family.

We additionally looked at the ratio of non‐synonymous to synonymous nucleotide substitutions (dN/dS) to estimate the mean direction of natural selection in the largest clusters. Almost in all cases, the rate of synonymous mutations was greater, indicating that overall, these ORFs are under purifying selection (Table S1). The three exceptions with dN/dS >1 are Clusters 10, 17, and 36; of these, Clusters 17 and 36, as already discussed, likely are non‐homologous, while Cluster 10 maps to a distinctive branch in the phylogenetic tree and contains 25 proteins, albeit with weak sequence similarity, which hints at an ongoing positive selection within this particular cluster.

Finally, we examined whether ORFs from different clusters can consistently be found together in the same genome which might be an indication that they form multi‐component systems for accomplishing some particular function. We indeed found several such instances, and the largest multi‐ORF system involves proteins from clusters 2, 5, 8, 9, 10, and 13, all found at the “Beta” site in a subset of Steitzviridae phages. While Cluster 13 proteins appear to be present throughout this phage group, we observe that Cluster 2 proteins can only occur together with those from Cluster 8, and Cluster 5 proteins from those of Clusters 9 and 10, and that these two subgroups correspond to two discernable clades in the phylogenetic tree. The order of these proteins appears to be conserved: Cluster 2 and 5 proteins are located directly after the CP and are followed by Clusters 8 and 9, and then Clusters 10 and 13, although not all proteins are present in all phages (Figure 4). We detected two other cases where a significant proportion of the genomes contain multiple ORFs from different similarity groups; both are located at the “Alpha” position in two Fiersviridae clades and involve proteins from clusters 32, 34, and 42, or clusters 41 and 44, respectively.

FIGURE 4 Co‐occurrence of ORFs from different clusters. Representative genome sequences encoding multiple non‐conserved ORFs are shown with their IMG/VR identifiers indicated on the left.

2.3 Structural features of the non‐conserved ORFs

Beyond similarity detectable by structure superposition, some more general themes among the non‐conserved ssRNA phage proteins are evident. There seems to be a notable prevalence of α‐helical proteins, with more than 70% of the ORFs within the largest 51 clusters having an all‐α architecture. About half of the all‐α proteins lack any predicted higher‐order structure and consist of just one, two, or occasionally three α‐helices that are often flanked by long disordered terminal segments (Figure 5). Furthermore, almost all of these proteins contain a predicted transmembrane region or a signal sequence for export to the bacterial periplasm; the only exceptions are Cluster 29, which consists of proteins with a single long α‐helix with apparent amphipathic properties, and Cluster 23, with a curious structure of a single non‐transmembrane α‐helix and a micro‐domain hatched on one end of the helix. In most of the remaining all‐α proteins, the α‐helices are predicted to weakly interact with each other and form loose bundles or other kinds of semi‐globular arrangements without a well‐defined core. Only in relatively few proteins—those from clusters 10, 13, 16, 24, and 27—the α‐helices form a compact structure with a hydrophobic core which is still relatively small except for Clusters 16 and 24; with an average length exceeding 150 residues, these are the largest all‐α proteins in our dataset.

FIGURE 5 Predicted three‐dimensional structure of representative proteins from the largest non‐conserved ORF similarity groups. The structures are colored according to the general structural type of the proteins: All‐α, no higher order structure (light magenta); all‐α, loosely associated (magenta); single α‐helix with a micro‐domain (dark magenta); all‐α, with a globular domain (red); α + β (yellow‐orange); α/β with a single β‐sheet (green); α/β with single β‐sandwich (teal); all‐β (blue). In addition, predicted transmembrane segments are shown in light violet and signal sequences for periplasmic export in aquamarine. The predicted local distance difference test (pLDDT) values for the structures are provided in Table S1.

The other major structural class of the non‐conserved ssRNA phage proteins is globular α/β proteins which comprise slightly over 20% of the ORFs within the largest clusters. These proteins are evidently larger than the all‐helical ORFs and range from approximately 90 residues (Cluster 8) to 170 residues (Cluster 47), but typically are around 120 to 150 residues in length. Except Cluster 31, the proteins of this group adopt a general structure of a three‐ or four‐stranded β‐sheet on one side of the protein and two to four α‐helices on the other side; however, despite similarities in the global architecture, they are otherwise rather diverse and there is little conservation in topology between the clusters. Cluster 31 holds a rather unique group of α/β proteins which consist of two β‐sheets, a longer and shorter one, which stack on top of each other at one end of the protein to form a small β‐sandwich, and typically two peripheral α‐helices at the other end of the protein. Of the remaining ORFs, a minor group of α + β proteins can additionally be recognized which includes short proteins with a β‐hairpin or a small three‐stranded β‐sheet and one or two short α‐helices which do not interact with the β‐region, as well as two small clusters of all‐β proteins which are almost entirely composed of either a flat (Cluster 38) or twisted (Cluster 48) small β‐sheet.

We additionally looked whether representative ORFs from the largest clusters might form homo‐oligomeric structures and found 10 instances where such multimers were predicted with a reasonable confidence (Table S1, Figure S1). Of these, the largest assemblies are those of Cluster 1 ORFs which appear to form a funnel‐shaped complex composed of eight monomers, and of Cluster 25 proteins which likely form a hexameric ring; the remaining multimers are predicted to be either dimers or trimers.

2.4 Recombinant expression and characterization of selected ORFs

To gain some insight into the actual physical properties of the non‐conserved ssRNA phage ORFs, we obtained the coding sequences of several of the predicted proteins via gene synthesis and attempted to produce them in a bacterial expression system. We put the main emphasis on the group of globular α/β proteins which we reasoned had the highest chance of being soluble, but we also tested some of the all‐α proteins which had no transmembrane segments. Of the 10 proteins tested, expression was detected for seven of them, and a further four proteins were found in the soluble fraction (Table 1). We did not observe bacterial lysis or other signs of toxicity to the cells when producing the proteins. To experimentally confirm the predicted structure of the ORFs, the soluble proteins were purified and subjected to crystallization trials. We obtained crystals of two Cluster 4 proteins and were able to solve the structure of one of them which we had designated 77717_1.

TABLE 1 Production and solubility of selected ssRNA phage non‐conserved ORFs.

ORF ID	Cluster	Length (aa)	Production	Solubility	
2318_1	4	117	+	+	
22730_1	4	115	+	+	
64659_1	4	175	−	−	
77717_1	4	105	+	+	
30967_1	7	123	+	−	
61716_4	8	140	−	−	
3295_1	12	150	+	+	
67644_3	25	135	+	−	
49249_4	28	124	+	−	
8999_2	30	203	−	−	

The crystal structure of the 77717_1 protein closely resembles the in silico prediction with a β‐sheet at one side of the protein and two α‐helices on the other side; the only notable deviations are observed in the conformation of the terminal regions and in a loop between the β‐sheet and α‐helices (residues 69–77). Consistent with the predicted oligomeric state of Cluster 4 proteins (Figure S1), the experimental structure showed that the 77717_1 protein is a dimer with the β‐sheets in the center and the α‐helices positioned peripherally on opposite sides of the complex (Figure 6a). Each β‐sheet consists of four strands, of which three originate from the same monomer while the fourth, lateral strand is contributed by the N‐terminal segment from the opposite subunit. Within the dimer, the β‐sheets stack in a β‐sandwich‐like configuration with the strands of the two monomers rotated by approximately 70° relative to one another. The β‐sheets form extensive hydrophobic interactions with each other that bury an area of 3377 Å2 between the two monomers. Interestingly, the 10 C‐terminal residues of one of the monomers are visible in an extended conformation in the electron density while the same region of the other monomer is disordered. The extended C‐termini bridge two neighboring 77717_1 dimers in the crystal via a two‐stranded β‐sheet, and the very C‐termini are engaged in a few additional contacts with the central part of the adjacent molecule (Figure 6b). However, we were unable to detect tetrameric 77717_1 species in solution using analytical size‐exclusion chromatography (data not shown), suggesting that the crystal contact might not reflect a biologically relevant multimerization state of the protein.

FIGURE 6 Crystal structure of the 77717_1 protein. (a) Three‐dimensional structure of the 77717_1 dimer. One of the monomers is rainbow‐colored blue to red in the direction from the N‐ to C‐ terminus while the other monomer is shown in gray. (b) interaction between two adjacent 77717_1 dimers in the crystal mediated by the C‐terminal regions from two of the monomers.

2.5 Discussion

The conserved proteins—the MP, CP and RdRp—serve the crucial roles of host recognition, genome packaging and RNA replication in essentially the same way in all ssRNA phages, but the way how these viruses accomplish another critical function—lysis of the bacterial cell—appears to be much less conserved. Therefore, it seems reasonable to assume that the majority of the non‐conserved ssRNA phage ORFs that we have identified in the current study are different kinds of lysis proteins that have evolved in this class of viruses. The LPs of the isolated and experimentally studied ssRNA phages are almost universally membrane‐associated, and identification of polypeptides with transmembrane regions using software tools has proved to be a reliable method for locating potential LPs within sequenced genomes (Kazaks et al., 2011; Klovins et al., 2002). Almost a third of the non‐conserved ORFs in our dataset are small proteins with a predicted signal sequence or a transmembrane helix which closely resemble characteristics of the previously known LPs, which therefore suggests that these ORFs likewise serve as the lysis proteins for the phages. The majority of the ORFs that we identified, however, do not possess predicted transmembrane regions, which nonetheless does not preclude that many of these proteins are still LPs. As demonstrated by the Qβ phage, bacterial lysis can be accomplished by blocking a cytosolic enzyme of the peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway (Bernhardt et al., 2001), but there is little reason to believe that such functionality must necessarily be provided by the MP. On the contrary, it would seem beneficial for the phage to encode a separate protein for lysis purpose which would give it much more freedom to evolve and adapt without being constrained by maintaining another function for the protein. Consequently, it seems plausible that different types of protein inhibitors may have evolved in various ssRNA phage lineages which target some of the numerous cytosolic enzymes of the peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway, and that such proteins might account for a significant proportion of the non‐conserved ORFs in ssRNA phage genomes. The observation that ORFs from certain similarity groups are consistently found one after another in the same genome provides some ground to speculate that some ssRNA phages might have evolved more complex multi‐component lysis systems, somewhat akin to the lysis operons of the tailed DNA bacteriophages (Young, 2014). One of the proteins in such multi‐ORF systems always appears to be the small transmembrane α‐helix‐containing polypeptide putatively assigned as the LP, while among the rest there seem to be no apparent similarities. The functions of these hypothetical accessory lysis proteins are obviously unknown, and co‐occurrence of these proteins certainly does not mean that they even are lysis‐related.

Recombinant expression of LPs from ssRNA phages with other hosts in Escherichia coli has previously been effective in inducing bacterial lysis (Kannoly et al., 2012; Kazaks et al., 2011; Klovins et al., 2002; Ruokoranta et al., 2006), yet none of the non‐conserved ORFs that we experimentally produced in our study resulted in such an outcome. However, the prior experiments were all done on transmembrane LPs, and presumably some major classes of these proteins, such as the MS2‐like membrane pore‐forming LPs, are relatively host‐agnostic. On the other hand, it has been shown that the MP‐mediated lysis by the Qβ phage is abolished by a single point mutation in the bacterial MurA protein (Bernhardt et al., 2001). Likewise, our expressed ORFs might represent legitimate LPs, which are highly specific for particular host bacteria but non‐functional in E. coli due to even minute differences in their target proteins.

Besides bacterial lysis, some of the non‐conserved ORFs probably do serve other purposes, and some hints of their possible functions might be provided by other phage groups, for example, the tailed DNA phages which typically encode numerous small proteins involved in host takeover, inactivation of anti‐phage defense systems, or modulation of transcription, translation, or genome replication of the virus (Duval & Cossart, 2017; Fremin et al., 2022). When the predicted ORF structures are compared to those in the Protein Data Bank, only Cluster 35 and 36 proteins show significant (DALI Z‐score >8) similarity to experimentally studied proteins. Due to the simple organization of a three‐helix bundle, the mostly eukaryotic protein hits for Cluster 36 likely bear no biological significance while Cluster 35, which contains some of the globular α/β proteins, shows similarity with ACT domains in various proteins which primarily function as regulatory elements in metabolic pathways, as well as the ribosomal protein S10 which has a similar fold (Figure S2). Detected similarity to an RNA‐binding protein might appear suggestive, but in absence of isolated phages that can be studied in a laboratory setting and without knowledge of their hosts, at present it would appear unproductive to further speculate about the possible functions of Cluster 35 or any other of the novel ssRNA phage proteins.

It is also interesting to contemplate how the non‐conserved ORFs might have appeared in the ssRNA phage genomes, particularly considering their distinctive types and the different genomic positions where they are found. Short ORFs can be identified in virtually any nucleotide sequence merely by chance and, considering the very high mutation rate of the ssRNA bacteriophages, sequences encoding short polypeptides are expected to constantly appear throughout their genomes in very short timescales. When such sequences are occasionally translated, it is conceivable that they sporadically happen to encode a polypeptide with useful properties for the phage, such as with a small transmembrane segment which manages to trigger bacterial lysis, and that these proteins are then kept due to positive selective pressure. Small proteins with signal sequences or transmembrane segments but no detectable similarity to each other are indeed frequently found in different genomic locations, hence the ssRNA phages have probably reinvented these kinds of LPs many times over during the course of their evolution. On the other hand, it would seem nearly impossible that the larger ORFs with a globular, well‐defined three‐dimensional structure have similarly appeared just by chance. A possible mechanism how these proteins might have emerged could involve duplication of a terminal region of one of the conserved proteins due to a replication error which could occasionally result in a structured domain of the original protein being copied as a separate ORF which can then evolve a different function over time. For instance, considering again the Qβ phage with its dual‐function MP, it could be envisioned that in some other phage the N‐terminal portion of the MP might have instead been duplicated as a stand‐alone ORF, and over time this new protein could have diverged and acquired an ability to lyse the bacterium while the MP retains its original function of binding to the pilus.

Another interesting observation in our study is the uneven distribution of the ORFs among the different genomic positions, the basis of which is not immediately clear. Considering the above hypothesis of sequence duplications as a source of novel ORFs, the conserved ORFs probably differ in their ability to give rise to new proteins, that is, some of the terminal fragments might be more stable than others as separate proteins, or their fold might be more malleable for adapting the protein to a new purpose, which would manifest in a non‐uniform distribution of ORFs among genomic positions. In addition, genomes of the ssRNA phages do not naturally exist as linear strands but fold into complex shapes due to extensive RNA secondary structures and long‐range base pair interactions which play an essential role in regulation of the viral genes, RNA replication, and packaging of the genome into the particles (reviewed in (Rumnieks & Tars, 2018)). Insertions or other rearrangements in the genome can potentially disturb important RNA features and thus be detrimental to the phage, for example, the 3′‐untranslated region is known to be important for both RNA replication (Klovins & van Duin, 1999) and binding to the MP (Dai et al., 2017; Gorzelnik et al., 2016), and introduction of additional sequences at the “Gamma” site might be selected against because of a high probability of disrupting the essential RNA structure there. In different phage groups, some yet unknown constraints might apply for other parts of the genome which could help to explain the observed ORF distribution pattern in the various phage families.

Our clustering analysis of the non‐conserved ssRNA phage proteins revealed that ORFs which constitute a particular cluster almost always originate from a single genomic site as would be expected yet, intriguingly, there are exceptions. False positives in sequence or structure similarity detection are prime culprits for such observations, and indeed there are indications of several such instances. As already noted, Cluster 17 is almost definitely such a case; the constituent ORFs of this cluster are small proteins of just two α‐helices and similarity among these proteins is recognized almost entirely based on their three‐dimensional structure. While these proteins might represent a case of convergent evolution and possibly even serve similar functions, there is little reason to believe that they are evolutionarily related. In Custers 6, 20, 27, or 49, the core is formed by proteins from a single genome position with high degree of similarity to each other while the few outliers from other genomic sites are connected with only one or two other proteins; such observations, too, cast doubt that these proteins are actually homologous with the rest of the cluster. In clusters 4 or 12, the situation is less clear because the similarity of the individual outlier proteins with the rest of the cluster is well supported, yet the most intriguing cases are presented by clusters 1 and 7. Within Cluster 1, over 8% of the proteins originate from the non‐dominant “Alpha” position and cover all of the other genomic sites except “Antisense,” and there is convincing sequence and structural similarity among most of these proteins. Despite the large cluster size, all of its constituent proteins are consistently found in Norzivirales but never in Timlovirales genomes, which gives some further credence that they are evolutionarily related. Cluster 7 is composed, in almost equal proportions, of proteins originating from “Alpha” and “Beta” positions with substantial structural similarity between many proteins from the two sites. Direct sequence similarity between individual “Alpha” and “Beta” proteins was below the clustering threshold we used in this study but could be detected by more sensitive iterative HMM‐based methods which suggests that the proteins from both genomic positions are indeed homologous. This leads to an unexpected conclusion that genes can occasionally move around in ssRNA phage genomes which has never been observed before. For producing such rearrangements, the RdRp would need to terminate and reinitiate RNA synthesis at a different position on the template multiple times without dissociating the product, all while keeping protein coding sequences in the shuffled genome functional. The probability of producing a viable genome this way seems minuscule, yet such events have apparently occurred several times during the evolutionary history of the ssRNA phages.

Due to the high number and low general similarity among the ORFs that we identified in our study, there is a legitimate question of whether these proteins genuinely exist in nature or if they are merely theoretical predictions without a biological meaning. Presumably, some of the predicted proteins, particularly those who remained singletons after clustering, are indeed random ORFs, and due to sequencing errors, some others still might originate from fragments of the conserved proteins which could not be detected by pHMMs due to the low similarity outside their core conserved regions. While it is impossible to avoid such artifacts completely, we have taken several measures to improve the reliability of our analysis. Since incomplete metagenome sequences often correlate with reduced data quality, low read coverage, and thus potential assembly errors, we only used near‐complete genome sequences to decrease the possibility of including fragments of MP, CP, or RdRp as potentially novel ORFs. As another measure, for our detailed analysis we only considered clusters with at least six non‐redundant proteins as the identification of similar ORFs in multiple genomes increases the chances that these sequences are evolutionarily conserved and thus represent biologically relevant proteins; the predominance of synonymous over non‐synonymous nucleotide substitutions in almost all of these clusters further strengthens the argument that these are indeed protein‐coding sequences which are being conserved during evolution.

We included ORFs predicted on the (−) strand of the genome in our analysis as the complementary strand is present during replication and, in principle, there are no particular restrictions for it not to be translated. These “Antisense” ORFs formed a small fraction (3.5%) of the predicted proteins and after clustering, a large proportion (83%) of them remained singletons which was notably higher than for ORFs from the (+) strand (47%–60%). The severe disproportion in the number of ORFs found on the (+) and (−) strands is another strong indication that the great majority of ORFs on the (+) strand are not chance artifacts since in that case, a similar number of ORFs should also be found on the negative‐sense strand. At the same time, these results do not give much credence that the ORFs predicted on the (−) strand are real, which is not entirely unexpected as it would be beneficial for the phage to produce copies of the (+) strand with maximum efficiency which would be hampered if a ribosome and RdRp were both competing for the same template. However, the group of six “Antisense” ORFs that we identified (Cluster 48) leaves an open possibility that in a few isolated cases, proteins might actually be produced from the negative RNA strand. Such a scenario would not be unprecedented as a number of (+)ssRNA animal and plant viruses indeed code small functional proteins on their (−) strand (Gong et al., 2023). Certainly, this will need to be confirmed experimentally, ideally, by detecting these proteins in phage‐infected cells when the respective phages are at some point isolated. Until then, as we have demonstrated in the current study, further support for the existence of the predicted ORFs could also be gained by recombinant expression of the ORFs as production of soluble, well‐structured proteins is extremely unlikely to occur merely by chance.

Finally, the 64% of the genomes in which we did not identify any additional ORFs besides the core proteins also deserve some mention. It is unlikely that these genomes do not encode additional proteins such as the LP; rather, there are limitations of what proteins are detected with the approach used in our analysis. We only used genomes in which both the conserved and non‐conserved proteins appear to be complete, but the very termini of the metagenome‐assembled genomes are still usually missing, which might preclude identification of some “Alpha” or “Gamma” ORFs. Also, some of the LPs of the previously identified ssRNA phage LPs are very short, down to 34 residues for phage AP205, and hence a portion of the LPs might remain below the 50‐residue cutoff that we used in this study as a reasonable balance between discovering as many new proteins as possible while not producing an overwhelming number of false positives. However, most of the missing LPs were presumably not detected because they, like in the majority of the experimentally studied phages, overlap or are completely nested inside the conserved ORFs (Chamakura et al., 2020), but we likewise did not include such proteins in the analysis due to the excessive amount of biologically irrelevant predictions that would arise.

Our study bears similarities with a recent structure prediction‐based approach to explore unannotated proteins in the entire Orthornavirae kingdom (Mutz et al., 2025); however, we complemented predicted structures with sequence‐based clustering to cover a broader range of uncharacterized ORFs and, as we were focusing on a single virus class, the smaller dataset size allowed us to use Alphafold for all structure predictions instead of the faster but less accurate ESMFold, potentially improving the reliability of the analysis. Nonetheless, we observed a similar fraction (~70%) of all‐α proteins among the non‐conserved Leviviricetes ORFs as in the orthornaviran pan‐proteome, and we likewise predicted a considerable proportion of structurally simple (single‐helix, often with disordered segments) and transmembrane region‐containing proteins which suggests that similar protein types independently arise in diverse RNA virus groups. The Mutz et al. study concluded that all of the common globular domains in orthornaviran proteins are already known; in contrast, except for one cluster, we did not detect convincing similarity of the non‐conserved Leviviricetes ORFs with previously characterized protein families. The lineage leading to the modern ssRNA phages is believed to have branched off early from other RNA viruses during evolution (Wolf et al., 2018), and the additional ORFs have likely appeared after that split, making their distribution limited in the context of the entire Orthornavirae kingdom. Our study nevertheless suggests that Leviviricetes genomes are probably one of the largest reservoirs of yet‐unexplored proteins among the RNA viruses, and while we have now characterized some of the most prevalent groups of such proteins, by no means is this endeavor complete. While some of the proteins which remained with no detected similar ORFs might not be biologically relevant, many others likely are, merely the current representation of these phages in the metagenomic studies is still incomplete, and perhaps at least an order of magnitude more RNA metagenomes from diverse environments will be required to adequately sample the diversity of ssRNA phage‐encoded novel proteins. Identification of the functions of these proteins is of even greater importance; experiments such as recombinant expression of some of the ORFs in model bacteria might be sufficient to uncover potential broad‐host range LPs, but clearly, eventual isolation of phages encoding the various non‐conserved ORFs and their studies in the laboratory will be required to fully understand all of the roles that these proteins play in the life cycles of these diverse viruses.

3 METHODS

3.1 Identification of ORFs

The IMG/VR v4.1 dataset (release IMG_VR_2022‐09‐20_7) was obtained from the JGI Genome Portal (https://genome.jgi.doe.gov/portal/IMG_VR). The provided IMG/VR metadata were used to find sequence identifiers corresponding to Leviviricetes phages, and a subset of 94,061 respective nucleotide sequences was extracted for further analysis. Using Prodigal (Hyatt et al., 2010) (version 2.6.3) with parameters “‐n ‐p meta”, a total of 274,711 ORFs were predicted in the Leviviricetes sequences. ORFs shorter than 50 residues were removed from the dataset, which reduced the number of ORFs to 261,891. The conserved phage proteins (MP, CP and RdRp) in the ≥50aa ORF dataset were identified using hmmsearch with the “Levi_extended_v2” set of pHMMs (see “Generation of additional CP profile HMMs”). High‐quality genome sequences were filtered based on criteria that the genomes must have a length between 3000 and 6000 nucleotides and encode at least 300, 100, and 500 residue‐long MP, CP and RdRp proteins, respectively, which additionally must be complete, that is, not run off the edges of the contig. In genomes that otherwise matched the filtering criteria but in which no CP was detected, a single ≥100 aa ORF between the MP and RdRp coding sequences was automatically assigned as the putative CP, and in case of several ORFs, their three‐dimensional structures were predicted using Alphafold (with modifications as detailed in the “Structure prediction” subsection) and the CP was identified manually by observing the characteristic fold. For further processing purposes, these putative CPs were assigned to a dummy “CP_OTHER” profile. Within the filtered set of 23,063 near‐complete genome sequences, a total of 10,275 complete ORFs were then identified that were not detected by any pHMMs.

3.2 Generation of additional CP profile HMMs

Due to high sequence variability, multiple pHMMs for each of the conserved proteins are required to enable their detection in diverged phage lineages, such as a previously published set of two RdRp, three MP, and nine CP pHMMs (Callanan et al., 2020) which form the basis of the current Leviviricetes taxonomy. When applied to the IMG/VR dataset, these pHMMs were able to reliably detect the MP and RdRp but covered only approximately 92% of the CP sequences, which called for additional CP pHMMs for optimal performance.

Initially, we picked CP sequences from bacteriophages AC, AIN001, AVE002, EMS000, ESE001, and ESE017 as representatives of additional CP types weakly covered by the existing pHMMs and performed a phmmer search against both the CP sequence dataset that they originated from (Table S1, (Lieknina et al., 2019)) and the ≥50aa IMG/VR Leviviricetes ORF dataset produced in this study. For each query, hits with a score over 30 were identified, and the corresponding CP sequences were clustered with cd‐hit (Fu et al., 2012) (version 4.8.1) at 90% identity to remove highly redundant sequences. The representative sequences of the clusters were aligned using mafft (Katoh & Standley, 2013) (version 7.526) with options “‐‐genafpair ‐‐maxiterate 1000,” and pHMMs from the alignments were generated with hmmbuild. The six newly created CP pHMMs (CP_AC, CP_AIN001, CP_AVE002, CP_EMS000, CP_ESE001, and CP_ESE017) were added to the previously published ones (Callanan et al., 2020), and the resulting “Levi_extended_v1” set of pHMMs was used to search the IMG/VR Leviviricetes ≥50aa ORF database with hmmsearch. Genomes which encoded complete, at least 300‐residue long MP and 500‐residue long RdRp ORFs but in which still no CP was detected by any of the pHMMs were identified, and ORF sequences between the MP and RdRp genes from these genomes were collected for further processing. In the case of a single such ORF, it was automatically assigned as the putative CP; otherwise, the three‐dimensional structures of all ORFs between the MP and RdRp were predicted using Alphafold, and the CP was identified manually by observing the characteristic fold. The set of putative CPs was then processed using cd‐hit, phmmer, mafft, and hmmbuild as already described. pHMMs obtained from alignments of at least three CP sequences (CP_IMGVR1 through CP_IMGVR21) were added to the previous ones, and the final pHMM set with 27 additional CP pHMMs was named “Levi_extended_v2.” This pHMM set was used for the detection of the conserved ssRNA phage proteins in this study and was able to identify over 99% of CPs in the IMG/VR dataset.

3.3 Clustering analysis

To remove nearly identical sequences, the 10,275 non‐conserved ORFs detected in the near‐complete genomes were clustered using cd‐hit at 95% sequence identity, which resulted in 3870 clusters. The representative sequences of the clusters were used to search the NCBI clustered_nr database with blatstp (Sayers et al., 2025), and hits with an E‐value below 0.001 were filtered for manual examination. In 18 cases, similarity with annotated MP or RdRp proteins was detected and in 20 further cases, similarity with various bacterial proteins was identified; these 38 ORF sequences were removed from the dataset. Sequences with matches to various hypothetical proteins predicted in Leviviricetes metagenome sequences, which constituted the majority of cases, were kept. Three‐dimensional structure of the ORFs was predicted with Alphafold, and the hhsearch output from the template search step of Alphafold runs was additionally checked for possible hits to known proteins, and further 39 sequences were removed that showed similarity to MP, RdRp, or non‐phage proteins with an E‐value below 0.01, resulting in a final dataset of 3793 sequences used for clustering. All‐against‐all sequence comparison of ORF sequences was done using phmmer, hits with a score over 20 were filtered, and a table of corresponding hit and query names was generated and imported in Cytoscape (Shannon et al., 2003) (version 3.10.3) for visualization of the clusters. All‐against‐all structure comparisons were performed with DaliLite (Holm, 2019) (version 5) using the ‐‐matrix parameter, and clustering was done based on a Z‐score threshold of 8.0. The phmmer and DALI clusters were combined using the “Merge Networks” feature with the “Union” option in Cytoscape. The sequence‐based clustering resulted in 2423 clusters, structure‐based clustering in 3095 clusters, and merging of both produced 2281 clusters.

3.4 Structure prediction

Three‐dimensional structure was predicted with Alphafold (Jumper et al., 2021) (version 2.3.2) with a modification to use the IMG/VR Leviviricetes ≥50aa ORF dataset instead of the default Unifer90, MGnify and BFD databases for homology searches, and with the jackhmmer running parameters within the pipeline changed to “‐N 5 ‐‐incE 0.001 ‐‐max” for increased sensitivity. For the prediction of homo‐oligomers of the ORFs, a similarly modified multimer pipeline was used. Initially, multimers ranging from dimers to hexamers were predicted for representative ORFs from each of the 51 largest clusters, and in cases where the predicted hexamer had a higher score than the preceding smaller oligomers, additional multimers ranging from a heptamer to a decamer were predicted. The multimers were ranked based on the interface predicted template modeling (ipTM) scores.

3.5 Determination of the dN/dS ratio

Structure‐based amino acid alignments for each of the 51 largest clusters were generated from the predicted three‐dimensional models with FoldMason (Gilchrist et al., 2026) (release 4‐dd3c235). Corresponding nucleotide alignments were prepared with trimAl (Capella‐Gutierrez et al., 2009) (version 1.4) with the “‐backtrans” option without alignment trimming. The overall mean dN and dS values for each cluster were calculated with MEGA (Stecher et al., 2026) (version 12.1.2) using the Distance Estimation analysis with the Nei‐Gojobori model and the pairwise deletion option applied to ambiguous positions for each sequence pair.

3.6 Phylogenetic reconstruction

RdRp sequences from 3237 genomes encoding the 3793 non‐redundant non‐conserved ORFs were extracted and combined with those from reference phages MS2 (NCBI GenBank accession: CAA23991), Qβ (BAP18765), C‐1 (AFN37815), Hgal1 (AFN37819), M (AFU61981), PRR1 (ABH03629), PP7 (CAA56475), AP205 (AAK20391), and phiCb5 (ADH83385). As an outgroup, RdRp sequences from Saccharomyces 23S RNA narnavirus (AAC98708), Saccharomyces 20S RNA narnavirus (AAC98925), Azolla filiculoides mitovirus 1 (DAB41741), Ophiostoma mitovirus 7 (AGT55877), Ceratobasidium mitovirus A (AOX47577), and Botrytis cinerea mitovirus 2 (CEZ26297) were added to the sequence set. Sequences were aligned with FAMSA (Deorowicz et al., 2016) (version 2.2.3) with the default parameters and the alignment was trimmed using TrimAl with the “‐gappyout” option, resulting in 565 sites. The phylogenetic tree was reconstructed in IQ‐TREE (Minh et al., 2020) (version 2.3.6) with the WAG + F + I + R10 model and 1000 ultrafast bootstrap replicates. For display purposes, the tree was rerooted at the Leviviricetes (Amabiliviricetes, Howeltoviricetes) split and the nodes were reordered in a decreasing order in FigTree (version 1.4.4). The metagenome sequences were assigned to the established Leviviricetes families and orders based on the highest‐scoring CP or RdRp pHMM hit, respectively, as described previously (Callanan et al., 2020).

3.7 Other software used

For pHMM‐based homology searches, programs phmmer, jackhmmer, hmmsearch, and hmmbuild from the HMMER software package (Eddy, 2011) (version 3.4) were used. Processing of outputs from HMMER and other programs for selection and filtering of genomes and ORFs, assignment of the genomic positions of the non‐conserved ORFs, and similar tasks were accomplished by basic Python scripting facilities via in‐house written scripts. Prediction of transmembrane segments and signal sequences in proteins was done using the DeepTMHMM web server (Hallgren et al., 2022). Visual representations of phage genome structure were generated with Clinker (Gilchrist & Chooi, 2021) (version 0.0.12). Plots were generated using the toytree, toyplot, and seaborn libraries in Python. The predicted three‐dimensional structures of the ORFs were visualized using the open‐source version of PyMOL (https://github.com/schrodinger/pymol-open-source, version 2.4).

3.8 Protein production and purification

The coding sequences of the selected ORFs in a pETDuet‐1 expression vector were obtained by gene synthesis (BioCat). The plasmids were transformed into E. coli strain BL21(DE3); the cells were grown in 2xTY medium at 37°C until OD600 of the culture reached 0.5, after which they were cooled down to 20°C, induced with IPTG at a final concentration of 1 mM and grown overnight at 20°C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation, lysed by sonication, and samples from the soluble and insoluble fractions analyzed in 15% SDS‐PAGE. Soluble proteins were purified by gel filtration on a Superdex 200 column followed by ion‐exchange chromatography on a Q Sepharose column (Cytiva).

3.9 Crystallography

The purified proteins were concentrated to 10 mg/mL using Amicon centrifugal ultrafiltration devices (Merck Millipore) and subjected to crystallization trials with commercially available crystallization screens (Molecular Dimensions) using the sitting drop vapor diffusion technique. Crystals of the 2318_1 protein were obtained in (0.1 M Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 0.2 M potassium thiocyanate, 18% [w/v] PEG 4000) and those of 77717_1 in (0.1 M MES, pH 6.5, 1.6 M ammonium sulfate, 10% [v/v] 1,4‐dioxane). Crystals were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen in the crystallization solution supplemented with 30% glycerol as a cryoprotectant. X‐ray diffraction data were collected at I03 beamline at the Diamond Light Source (Oxfordshire, United Kingdom) and initially processed using the on‐site autoprocessing pipeline. Crystals of the 2318_1 protein diffracted to 1.9 Å but had low symmetry (space group P21) and an unexpectedly large unit cell with estimated 15–25 molecules in the asymmetric unit, and probably due to these reasons, we were not successful in solving the structure by molecular replacement. The 77717_1 protein crystallized in the I212121 space group with diffraction data extending to 2.0 Å resolution. The structure was solved by molecular replacement with the program Molrep (Vagin & Teplyakov, 2010) from the CCP4 software suite (Collaborative Computational Project, N, 1994) using the predicted Alphafold structure as the search model. The model was manually rebuilt in Coot (Emsley et al., 2010) and refined using Refmac (Murshudov et al., 2011). Data collection, refinement and validation statistics are provided in Table 2. Buried surface analysis was carried out using the CCP4 program AreaIMol. Data processing, refinement and validation statistics are shown in Table 2.

TABLE 2 Data processing, refinement and validation statistics.

Data processing		
Wavelength (Å)	0.9184	
Space group	I 21 21 21	
Cell parameters	a = 54.44 Å; b = 61.29 Å; c = 122.61 Å	
Total number of observations	212,512	
Number of unique reflections	16,564	
Resolution range (Å)	40.70–1.90	
Highest resolution bin (Å)	1.90–1.94	
Completeness (%)	98.6 (100.0)	
R‐merge	0.175 (1.109)	
I/ϭI	5.1 (1.1)	
Refinement		
Resolution used (Å)	40.70–2.00	
Highest resolution bin (Å)	2.10–2.00	
R	0.235	
R‐free	0.307	
Number of atoms		
Protein	1570	
Water	53	
Average B‐factors (Å 2 )		
All atoms	47.0	
Geometry deviations		
RMSD bonds (Å)	0.009	
RMSD angles (°)	0.91	
Ramachandran plot		
Favored (%)	98%	
Allowed (%)	2%	
Outliers (%)	0%	

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

JR performed the majority of bioinformatics work, IB performed the initial bioinformatics analysis and produced proteins, MS produced proteins and performed most of the crystallography, KT designed the study and performed the initial crystallography analysis. All authors contributed to writing the manuscript.

Supporting information

Figure S1. Predicted multimeric assemblies of the non‐conserved ssRNA phage ORFs. The structures of plausible (interface predicted template modeling (ipTM) score ≥0.8) homo‐oligomers are shown with one of the subunits colored according to their structural type as per Figure 5.

Figure S2. Experimentally studied proteins with three‐dimensional structure similar to the predicted structure of Cluster 35 proteins.

Table S1. Some properties of the 51 largest clusters. For each cluster, the representative ORF identifier used for analysis is provided (protein sequences, predicted structures and metadata are found in Supplementary Data) along with reliability indicators for Alphafold structure prediction (average pLDDT: average value of the predicted local distance difference test per residue; pTM, predicted template modeling score; ipTM, interface predicted template modeling score). The mean ratio of non‐synonymous to synonymous nucleotide substitutions (dN/dS) for each cluster is additionally provided.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This study was supported within the framework of the European Union's Recovery and Resilience Mechanism (Project No. 5.2.1.1.i.0/2/24/I/CFLA/001 “Consolidation of the Latvian Institute of Organic Synthesis and the Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre”).

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

Nucleotide and protein sequences used in the study, metadata about the predicted ORFs and their clustering, the reconstructed phylogenetic tree, and the predicted three‐dimensional structures of the proteins are available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19678525. Coordinates and structure factors of the 77717_1 protein are available from the Protein Data Bank under accession code 9HQ8.


REFERENCES

Antillon SF , Bernhardt TG , Chamakura K , Young R . Physiological characterization of single‐gene lysis proteins. J Bacteriol. 2024;206(3):e0038423.38426721 10.1128/jb.00384-23 PMC10955853
Beremand MN , Blumenthal T . Overlapping genes in RNA phage: a new protein implicated in lysis. Cell. 1979;18(2):257–266.387256 10.1016/0092-8674(79)90045-x
Bernhardt TG , Wang IN , Struck DK , Young R . A protein antibiotic in the phage Qbeta virion: diversity in lysis targets. Science. 2001;292(5525):2326–2329.11423662 10.1126/science.1058289
Callanan J , Stockdale SR , Adriaenssens EM , Kuhn JH , Rumnieks J , Pallen MJ , et al. Leviviricetes: expanding and restructuring the taxonomy of bacteria‐infecting single‐stranded RNA viruses. Microb Genom. 2021;7(11):000686.34747690 10.1099/mgen.0.000686 PMC8743537
Callanan J , Stockdale SR , Shkoporov A , Draper LA , Ross RP , Hill C . Expansion of known ssRNA phage genomes: from tens to over a thousand. Sci Adv. 2020;6(6):eaay5981.32083183 10.1126/sciadv.aay5981 PMC7007245
Camargo AP , Nayfach S , Chen IMA , Palaniappan K , Ratner A , Chu K , et al. IMG/VR v4: an expanded database of uncultivated virus genomes within a framework of extensive functional, taxonomic, and ecological metadata. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023;51(D1):D733–D743.36399502 10.1093/nar/gkac1037 PMC9825611
Capella‐Gutierrez S , Silla‐Martinez JM , Gabaldon T . trimAl: a tool for automated alignment trimming in large‐scale phylogenetic analyses. Bioinformatics. 2009;25(15):1972–1973.19505945 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp348 PMC2712344
Chamakura KR , Sham LT , Davis RM , Min L , Cho H , Ruiz N , et al. A viral protein antibiotic inhibits lipid II flippase activity. Nat Microbiol. 2017;2(11):1480–1484.28894177 10.1038/s41564-017-0023-4 PMC5764540
Chamakura KR , Tran JS , O'Leary C , Lisciandro HG , Antillon SF , Garza KD , et al. Rapid de novo evolution of lysis genes in single‐stranded RNA phages. Nat Commun. 2020;11(1):6009.33243984 10.1038/s41467-020-19860-0 PMC7693330
Collaborative Computational Project, N . The CCP4 suite: programs for protein crystallography. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 1994;50(Pt 5):760–763.15299374 10.1107/S0907444994003112
Dai X , Li Z , Lai M , Shu S , du Y , Zhou ZH , et al. In situ structures of the genome and genome‐delivery apparatus in a single‐stranded RNA virus. Nature. 2017;541(7635):112–116.27992877 10.1038/nature20589 PMC5701785
Deorowicz S , Debudaj‐Grabysz A , Gudys A . FAMSA: fast and accurate multiple sequence alignment of huge protein families. Sci Rep. 2016;6:33964.27670777 10.1038/srep33964 PMC5037421
Duval M , Cossart P . Small bacterial and phagic proteins: an updated view on a rapidly moving field. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2017;39:81–88.29111488 10.1016/j.mib.2017.09.010
Eddy SR . Accelerated profile HMM searches. PLoS Comput Biol. 2011;7(10):e1002195.22039361 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002195 PMC3197634
Emsley P , Lohkamp B , Scott WG , Cowtan K . Features and development of Coot. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2010;66(Pt 4):486–501.20383002 10.1107/S0907444910007493 PMC2852313
Fremin BJ , Bhatt AS , Kyrpides NC , Sengupta A , Sczyrba A , Maria da Silva A , et al. Thousands of small, novel genes predicted in global phage genomes. Cell Rep. 2022;39(12):110984.35732113 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.110984 PMC9254267
Fu L , Niu B , Zhu Z , Wu S , Li W . CD‐HIT: accelerated for clustering the next‐generation sequencing data. Bioinformatics. 2012;28(23):3150–3152.23060610 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts565 PMC3516142
Gilchrist CLM , Chooi YH . clinker & clustermap.js: automatic generation of gene cluster comparison figures. Bioinformatics. 2021;37(16):2473–2475.33459763 10.1093/bioinformatics/btab007
Gilchrist CLM , Mirdita M , Steinegger M . Multiple protein structure alignment at scale with FoldMason. Science. 2026;391(6784):485–488.41610233 10.1126/science.ads6733
Goessens WH , Driessen AJ , Wilschut J , van Duin J . A synthetic peptide corresponding to the C‐terminal 25 residues of phage MS2 coded lysis protein dissipates the protonmotive force in Escherichia coli membrane vesicles by generating hydrophilic pores. EMBO J. 1988;7(3):867–873.2840287 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1988.tb02886.x PMC454404
Gong P , Shen Q , Zhang M , Qiao R , Jiang J , Su L , et al. Plant and animal positive‐sense single‐stranded RNA viruses encode small proteins important for viral infection in their negative‐sense strand. Mol Plant. 2023;16(11):1794–1810.37777826 10.1016/j.molp.2023.09.020
Gorzelnik KV , Cui Z , Reed CA , Jakana J , Young R , Zhang J . Asymmetric cryo‐EM structure of the canonical Allolevivirus Qbeta reveals a single maturation protein and the genomic ssRNA in situ. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2016;113(41):11519–11524.27671640 10.1073/pnas.1609482113 PMC5068298
Hallgren J , Tsirigos KD , Pedersen MD , Armenteros JJA , Marcatili P , Nielsen H , et al. DeepTMHMM predicts alpha and beta transmembrane proteins using deep neural networks. bioRxiv. 2022;2022.04.08.487609.
Hofstetter H , Monstein HJ , Weissmann C . The readthrough protein A1 is essential for the formation of viable Q beta particles. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1974;374(2):238–251.4611493 10.1016/0005-2787(74)90366-9
Holm L . Benchmarking fold detection by DaliLite v.5. Bioinformatics. 2019;35(24):5326–5327.31263867 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz536
Hyatt D , Chen GL , LoCascio PF , Land ML , Larimer FW , Hauser LJ . Prodigal: prokaryotic gene recognition and translation initiation site identification. BMC Bioinformatics. 2010;11:119.20211023 10.1186/1471-2105-11-119 PMC2848648
Jumper J , Evans R , Pritzel A , Green T , Figurnov M , Ronneberger O , et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature. 2021;596(7873):583–589.34265844 10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2 PMC8371605
Kannoly S , Shao Y , Wang IN . Rethinking the evolution of single‐stranded RNA (ssRNA) bacteriophages based on genomic sequences and characterizations of two R‐plasmid‐dependent ssRNA phages, C‐1 and Hgal1. J Bacteriol. 2012;194(18):5073–5079.22821966 10.1128/JB.00929-12 PMC3430324
Karnik S , Billeter M . The lysis function of RNA bacteriophage Qbeta is mediated by the maturation (A2) protein. EMBO J. 1983;2(9):1521–1526.11892805 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1983.tb01617.x PMC555316
Katoh K , Standley DM . MAFFT multiple sequence alignment software version 7: improvements in performance and usability. Mol Biol Evol. 2013;30(4):772–780.23329690 10.1093/molbev/mst010 PMC3603318
Kazaks A , Voronkova T , Rumnieks J , Dishlers A , Tars K . Genome structure of caulobacter phage phiCb5. J Virol. 2011;85(9):4628–4631.21325422 10.1128/JVI.02256-10 PMC3126270
Klovins J , Overbeek GP , van den Worm SHE , Ackermann H‐W , van Duin J . Nucleotide sequence of a ssRNA phage from Acinetobacter: kinship to coliphages. J Gen Virol. 2002;83(Pt 6):1523–1533.12029168 10.1099/0022-1317-83-6-1523
Klovins J , van Duin J . A long‐range pseudoknot in Qbeta RNA is essential for replication. J Mol Biol. 1999;294(4):875–884.10588893 10.1006/jmbi.1999.3274
Kohga H , Lertpreedakorn N , Miyazaki R , Wu S , Hosoda K , Tanaka H , et al. Phage lysis protein Lys(M) acts as a wedge to block MurJ conformational changes. Sci Adv. 2025;11(41):eady8083.41061077 10.1126/sciadv.ady8083 PMC12506998
Krishnamurthy SR , Janowski AB , Zhao G , Barouch D , Wang D . Hyperexpansion of RNA bacteriophage diversity. PLoS Biol. 2016;14(3):e1002409.27010970 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002409 PMC4807089
Lieknina I , Kalniņš G , Akopjana I , Bogans J , Šišovs M , Jansons J , et al. Production and characterization of novel ssRNA bacteriophage virus‐like particles from metagenomic sequencing data. J Nanobiotechnology. 2019;17(1):61.31084612 10.1186/s12951-019-0497-8 PMC6513524
Mezhyrova J , Martin J , Börnsen C , Dötsch V , Frangakis AS , Morgner N , et al. In vitro characterization of the phage lysis protein MS2‐L. Microbiome Res Rep. 2023;2(4):28.38045926 10.20517/mrr.2023.28 PMC10688784
Minh BQ , Schmidt HA , Chernomor O , Schrempf D , Woodhams MD , von Haeseler A , et al. IQ‐TREE 2: new models and efficient methods for phylogenetic inference in the genomic era. Mol Biol Evol. 2020;37(5):1530–1534.32011700 10.1093/molbev/msaa015 PMC7182206
Murshudov GN , Skubák P , Lebedev AA , Pannu NS , Steiner RA , Nicholls RA , et al. REFMAC5 for the refinement of macromolecular crystal structures. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2011;67(Pt 4):355–367.21460454 10.1107/S0907444911001314 PMC3069751
Mutz P , Camargo AP , Sahakyan H , Neri U , Butkovic A , Wolf YI , et al. The protein structurome of Orthornavirae and its dark matter. MBio. 2025;16(2):e0320024.39714180 10.1128/mbio.03200-24 PMC11796362
Neri U , Wolf YI , Roux S , Camargo AP , Lee B , Kazlauskas D , et al. Expansion of the global RNA virome reveals diverse clades of bacteriophages. Cell. 2022;185(21):4023–4037 e18.36174579 10.1016/j.cell.2022.08.023
Olsthoorn RC , Garde G , Dayhuff T , Atkins JF , Van Duin J . Nucleotide sequence of a single‐stranded RNA phage from Pseudomonas aeruginosa: kinship to coliphages and conservation of regulatory RNA structures. Virology. 1995;206(1):611–625.7831817 10.1016/s0042-6822(95)80078-6
Pumpens P . Single‐stranded RNA phages: from molecular biology to nanotechnology. Boca Raton, USA: CRC Press; Taylor & Francis Group; 2020.
Rumnieks J , Rūmnieks J , Liekniņa I , Kalniņš G , Šišovs M , Akopjana I , et al. Three‐dimensional structure of 22 uncultured ssRNA bacteriophages: flexibility of the coat protein fold and variations in particle shapes. Sci Adv. 2020;6(36):eabc0023.32917600 10.1126/sciadv.abc0023 PMC7467689
Rumnieks J , Tars K . Diversity of pili‐specific bacteriophages: genome sequence of IncM plasmid‐dependent RNA phage M. BMC Microbiol. 2012;12:277.23176223 10.1186/1471-2180-12-277 PMC3561173
Rumnieks J , Tars K . Protein‐RNA interactions in the single‐stranded RNA bacteriophages. Subcell Biochem. 2018;88:281–303.29900502 10.1007/978-981-10-8456-0_13
Ruokoranta TM , Grahn AM , Ravantti JJ , Poranen MM , Bamford DH . Complete genome sequence of the broad host range single‐stranded RNA phage PRR1 places it in the Levivirus genus with characteristics shared with Alloleviviruses. J Virol. 2006;80(18):9326–9330.16940544 10.1128/JVI.01005-06 PMC1563911
Sayers EW , Beck J , Bolton EE , Brister JR , Chan J , Connor R , et al. Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnology Information in 2025. Nucleic Acids Res. 2025;53(D1):D20–D29.39526373 10.1093/nar/gkae979 PMC11701734
Shannon P , Markiel A , Ozier O , Baliga NS , Wang JT , Ramage D , et al. Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res. 2003;13(11):2498–2504.14597658 10.1101/gr.1239303 PMC403769
Shi M , Lin XD , Tian JH , Chen LJ , Chen X , Li CX , et al. Redefining the invertebrate RNA virosphere. Nature. 2016;540(7634):539–543.27880757 10.1038/nature20167
Starr EP , Nuccio EE , Pett‐Ridge J , Banfield JF , Firestone MK . Metatranscriptomic reconstruction reveals RNA viruses with the potential to shape carbon cycling in soil. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019;116(51):25900–25908.31772013 10.1073/pnas.1908291116 PMC6926006
Stecher G , Suleski M , Tao Q , Tamura K , Kumar S . MEGA 12.1: cross‐platform release for macOS and Linux operating systems. J Mol Evol. 2026;94(1):14–18.41247409 10.1007/s00239-025-10287-z
Vagin A , Teplyakov A . Molecular replacement with MOLREP. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2010;66(Pt 1):22–25.20057045 10.1107/S0907444909042589
Walderich B , Ursinus‐Wössner A , van Duin J , Höltje JV . Induction of the autolytic system of Escherichia coli by specific insertion of bacteriophage MS2 lysis protein into the bacterial cell envelope. J Bacteriol. 1988;170(11):5027–5033.3053640 10.1128/jb.170.11.5027-5033.1988 PMC211567
Weiner AM , Weber K . Natural read‐through at the UGA termination signal of Q‐beta coat protein cistron. Nat New Biol. 1971;234(50):206–209.5288807 10.1038/newbio234206a0
Wolf YI , Kazlauskas D , Iranzo J , Lucía‐Sanz A , Kuhn JH , Krupovic M , et al. Origins and evolution of the global RNA virome. MBio. 2018;9(6):e02329–18.30482837 10.1128/mBio.02329-18 PMC6282212
Young R . Phage lysis: three steps, three choices, one outcome. J Microbiol. 2014;52(3):243–258.24585055 10.1007/s12275-014-4087-z PMC4012431
