
JOURNAL INFORMATION
==============================
NLM Title Abbreviation: J Agric Food Chem
Journal ID: J Agric Food Chem
Journal ID: jf

Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry

ISSN: 0021-8561
EISSN: 1520-5118
pubs.acs.org/JAFC

ARTICLE INFORMATION
==============================
PMCID: PMC12921844
PMID: 41653128
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.5c13240
Article version: 1
Subjects: Article, Agricultural and Environmental Chemistry

Self-Assembling Nanoparticle Enhances RNA Interference Efficiency against Hyphantria Cunea (Drury) with Minimal Risk to Nontarget Organisms

6891677 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1652-0564 Wu Mengting
7894369 Liu Wenhui
7894374 Jiang Chunmei
7894375 Mao Yu
7894377 Lan Feng
6771124 Bai Jianyang
7894379 Gu Tianzi
7894382 Wu Binyu
7894373 Zhang Jiang
5026052 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6436-4597 Zhang Longwa
7894365 Chang Ling
† Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Biological Control, School of Forestry & Landscape Architecture , 12486 Anhui Agricultural University , Hefei 230036 , China
‡ Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Forest Resources and Silviculture, School of Forestry & Landscape Architecture , Anhui Agricultural University , Hefei 230036 , China
§ State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, School of Life Sciences , 12563 Hubei University , Wuhan 430062 , China
∥ Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory of Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs , Agricultural Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences , Shenzhen 518000 , China
* Email: lingchang@hubu.edu.cn. * Email: zhanglw@ahau.edu.cn.
Electronic publication date: 2026 Feb 7
Publication date: 2026 Feb 18
Volume: 74
Issue: 6
First page: 5107
Last page: 5122
Received 2025 Oct 2; Accepted 2026 Jan 30; Revised 2026 Jan 29; 2026 Feb 7
Copyright: © 2026 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society
Copyright year: 2026
Copyright holder: The Authors

License: This article is licensed under CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0
License URL: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Keywords: Hyphantria cunea, bacteriophage MS2 virus-like particles, RNA interference, pest management, risk assessment

Funding: National Natural Science Foundation of China 10.13039/501100001809 32272634

Funding: National Natural Science Foundation of China 10.13039/501100001809 32302454

Funding: National Natural Science Foundation of China 10.13039/501100001809 32371890

Funding: National Key Research and Development Program of China 10.13039/501100012166 2023YFC2604802

Funding: Scientific Research Project of the Anhui Provincial Department of Education NA 2025AHGXZK40282
document-id-old-9: jf5c13240
document-id-new-14: jf5c13240
production-flag-MathML-config-version: 3
production-flag-journal-citation-display-style: acs-titles
production-flag-journal-date-display-style: dates-used-rcd-rvd-acc
production-flag-si-avail: yes
document-id-alt-64: d8829e47c23fe842e3e65fdeba4469342330108c9be777e7a9af6fbedcbf1935

==============================
RNA interference (RNAi) represents a promising approach for insect pest management; however, its application in Lepidoptera is constrained by double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) instability, limited cellular uptake, and inefficient RNAi machinery. In this study, we developed a bacteriophage MS2 virus-like particle (VLP)-based delivery platform for hairpin RNA (hpRNA) targeting the invasive pest Hyphantria cunea. When expressed in Escherichia coli, MS2 VLPs efficiently encapsulate hpRNA, markedly enhancing its resistance to nuclease activity and environmental degradation. In addition, surface display of the HIV trans-activator of transcription (TAT) peptide on MS2 VLPs significantly improved cellular internalization of hpRNA, resulting in robust RNAi-mediated gene silencing in H. cunea at low hpRNA doses. Importantly, no adverse effects were detected in three nontarget organisms: Clostera restitura, Plagiodera versicolora, and the parasitoid Chouioia cunea. Together, these results demonstrate that the MS2-hpRNA system represents a scalable, effective, and environmentally safe strategy for RNA-based pest control.

1 Introduction

Hyphantria cunea (Drury), commonly known as the fall webworm, is a quarantine agroforestry pest native to North America. Due to its robust adaptability and migratory capabilities, H. cunea has rapidly proliferated across various countries and regions in Asia and Europe, demonstrating its remarkable ability to colonize new territories. This pest first infiltrated Asia in 1945 and was officially documented in China in 1979. Owing to its substantial food consumption, broad spectrum of host plants, and high reproductive capacity, H. cunea has inflicted significant damage on forestry and agriculture in infested areas. With the ongoing global warming, the geographical range of H. cunea is expanding, which inevitably hastens its proliferation. Currently, the control of H. cunea primarily relies on the application of broad-spectrum pesticides. However, this conventional approach has led to profound challenges encapsulated by the “3Rs” paradigm: which encompasses resistance, resurgence, and residue. Several methods, including parasitoid wasps, sex pheromone traps, and microbial pesticides are employed to manage H. cunea. Nonetheless, the development of eco-friendly biopesticides with insecticidal properties and ecological safety is imperative.

In recent years, RNA interference (RNAi) technology has emerged as a promising alternative to chemical pesticides. RNAi technology represents a cutting-edge crop protection method with significant potential in addressing global challenges such as environment preservation, human health protection, and food security enhancement. This technology operates by administering double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs) that target crucial insect genes for pest management. The application of spray-induced gene silencing technology has shown promising results in controlling various pests, including, the Colorado potato beetle (Leptinotarsa decemlineata), the German cockroach (Blattella germanica), the Oriental fruit moth (Mythimna separata), and the Oriental fruit fly (Bactrocera dorsalis). In recent years, the field of biopesticides utilizing RNAi technology has made significant strides with the approval of Ledprona (sold under the trade name Calantha) in the United States in December 2023. This milestone marks the first endorsement by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US-EPA) for a sprayable RNAi-based active ingredient designed to combat L. decemlineata (https://www.epa.gov/pesticides/epa-registers-novel-pesticide-technology-potato-crops), thereby catalyzing the advancement of dsRNA-based insecticides for plant protection. In the case of H. cunea, RNAi was initially recognized as a viable control strategy in 2011. However, similar to observations in other lepidopteran insects where factors like dsRNA-degrading nucleases and inefficient intracellular transportation hindered RNAi efficacy, , H. cunea also demonstrated compromised RNAi efficiency due to high dsRNA-degrading nuclease activity.

Virus-like particles (VLPs) are noninfectious nanoparticles that mimic the structure of viruses but lack the viral genome, representing a form of biphasic or “core–shell” structured nanomaterial capable of safeguarding encapsulated RNA molecules from various nucleases. Among these, MS2-VLPs, derived from RNA bacteriophage, self-assemble from 180 copies of coat proteins (CPs) into a monodisperse, icosahedral capsid with a diameter of 22–29 nm. , These VLPs have been harnessed for targeted delivery of RNAs or DNAs, epitope peptides, and drugs within the protein capsid. Upon entry into cells via receptor-mediated endocytosis, MS2 particles significantly enhance intracellular transduction efficiency through innovative phage surface display combined with cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs), such as the Trans-Activator of Transcription (TAT) peptide from human immunodeficiency virus HIV-1. The TAT peptide is among the most effective CPPs identified. Its protein transduction domain (residues 47–57: YGRKKRRQRRR) enables efficient transmembrane transport. When conjugated to MS2-VLPs, TAT significantly enhances intracellular miRNA delivery and RNAi efficiency. Beyond mammalian systems, the TAT peptide facilitates transepithelial transport in insect midgut cells, as demonstrated in Helicoverpa armigera and Bombyx mori, thereby extending the potential applications of MS2-TAT VLPs for agricultural pest control. Notably, this system has been successfully deployed by encapsulating artificial microRNAs in bacterial and plant plastid expression systems, overcoming key limitations in RNAi-based pest management. MS2-TAT VLPs have shown success against challenging pest species including H. armigera and Spodoptera liturainsects known for both their high gut nuclease activity and resistance to conventional RNAi-based pesticides. ,

In this study, we present a delivery system utilizing MS2-VLPs that self-assembled within E. coli to safeguard and transport hairpin RNA (hpRNA). The hpRNA encapsulated by MS2 could induce effective RNAi in H. cunea by slowing down the degradation of intact hpRNA. Significantly, the MS2-encapsulated hpRNA, which targeted H. cunea, posed no safety risk to three nontarget organisms (NTOs): Clostera restitura Walker (Lepidoptera), Plagiodera versicolora Laicharting (Coleoptera) and Chouioia cunea Yang (Hymenoptera).

2 Materials and Methods

2.1 Insects Rearing

H. cunea egg masses were sourced from Fawu Nursery in Xuzhou City, Jiangsu Province. The larvae were raised on an artificial diet and poplar leaves under a 14:10 h light/dark photoperiod at a temperature of 26 ± 1 °C and a relative humidity of 65 ± 5%. The artificial diet was purchased from the Laboratory of the Insect Virus Research Center, Chinese Academy of Forestry, and poplar leaves were gathered from Anhui Agricultural University. Newly hatched larvae were nourished with artificial diets under consistent conditions until reaching the third instar, at which point the freshly molted third instar larvae were selected for subsequent feeding experiments. Under these conditions, H. cunea is able to complete its entire life cycle, including pupation and adult emergence.

2.2 Selection of Target Genes and Identification of Gene Sequences

For effective RNAi target genes selection in H. cunea, NADH dehydrogenase ubiquinone flavoprotein 2 (NDUFVII), Acetylcholinesterase (ACE), V-type proton ATPase subunit A (V-ATPase A), and subunit D (V-ATPase D) genes were chosen, which have been shown as effective RNAi targets in H. armigera and H. cunea. NDUFVII is a core subunit of the mitochondrial membrane respiratory chain known as Complex I. This enzyme catalyzes the transfer of electrons from NADH through the respiratory chain. ACE plays a crucial role in signal transmission between nerve cells. The V-ATPase is a highly conserved, evolutionarily ancient enzyme responsible for the electrogenic transport of protons. Concurrently, genes associated with dsRNA internalization pathways were also included to investigate dsRNA uptake pathways, including Clathrin, Eater, and Systemic RNA interference deficient-1-like (SIL) genes. Clathrin is a well-structured protein involved in clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Eater encodes a scavenger receptor that can uptake dsRNA via receptor-mediated endocytosis. SIL1 encodes the multipass transmembrane protein SID-1, which is essential for the uptake and distribution of dsRNA between Caenorhabditis elegans cells. The sequences of the target genes and dsRNA internalization-related genes were identified through local BLAST analysis against annotated coding sequences (CDSs) and peptide files sourced from NCBI GenBank (GenBank accession no. GCA_003709505.1). The tBLASTn parameters were set as follows: e-value cutoff of 1e-5, minimum identity threshold of 70%, and alignment coverage ≥ 60% of the query length. Additional details regarding the selected genes can be found in Table S1.

2.3 In Vitro dsRNA Synthesis

Small interfering RNA (siRNA) prediction was conducted to identify the most potent siRNAs using the siDirect online tool (http://sidirect2.rnai.jp/) for dsRNA fragment selection. To generate dsRNA for injection experiments, total RNA was extracted from one-fourth larvae using the RNAiso plus Reagent (TransGen Biotech, China) following the manufacturer’s guidelines. One microgram of total RNA was used for cDNA synthesis using a HiScript III first Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Vazyme Biotech, Nanjing, China) following the manufacturer’s instructions. After cDNA synthesis, the templates of target genes were amplified by PCR using gene-specific primers ligated to the 20 bp T7 RNA polymerase promoter (listed in Table S2). The dsRNAs corresponding to the selected candidate genes were subsequently synthesized using the T7 RiboMAX Express RNAi System (Promega), following the manufacturer’s instructions.

Four microgram of synthetic dsRNAs (2 μg/μL in nuclease-free water) targeting each candidate gene was microinjected between the fourth and fifth abdominal segments of every fourth-instar larva using a microinjector (Hamilton). Each group comprised 45 (n = 15; three replicates), and the mortality rate was monitored for 14 days post-treatment. Larvae injected with an equivalent amount of dsGFP were utilized as controls. Moreover, five larvae were randomly selected from each treatment group (as five replicates) for assessment of target gene expression levels 72 h post-treatment with dsRNA.

2.4 Analysis of dsRNA Internalization Mechanism via RNAi of RNAi

RNAi of RNAi was conducted to validate the roles of Clathrin, SIL, and Eater genes in dsRNA internalization. Since V-ATPase A had already been validated as an effective RNAi target, it was used as a quantitative marker to assess the impact of silencing internalization-related genes on RNAi efficiency. DsClathrin, dsSIL, and dsEater were combined with dsATPaseA before being injected into H. cunea. In parallel, larvae injected with dsGFP or dsATPaseA served as controls, with each type of injected dsRNA amounting to 4 μg. To assess the suppression levels of Clathrin, SIL, and Eater genes, dsGFP was mixed with dsClathrin, dsSIL, and dsEater and injected into H. cunea as well. The experimental schedule was presented alongside a diagram (Figure S1). Subsequently, five larvae were randomly selected for the evaluation of V-ATPase A, Clathrin, SIL, and Eater gene expression levels 72 h postinjection.

2.5 Expression of hpRNA and MS2-VLPs in E. coli

The HT115 (DE3) competent cells and L4440 vector were purchased from Tiangen Company (Beijing, China), the pET-28a expression vector from General Biologics (Anhui, China), and the TA/Blunt-Zero cloning vector from Vazyme Biotech Company (Nanjing, China). Both vectors pET28a-MS2, which coexpresses the dimer of the MS2 coat protein (2CP) and HIV TAT47–57 (referred to as MS2), and pET28a-2CP, which only expresses viral coat protein particle 2CP without TAT peptide (referred to as 2CP), both under the control of T7 promoter, were obtained from Hubei University. The expression of hpRNA was regulated by the T7 promotor and terminated by the T7 terminator. An intron sequence from GA20 was inserted between the converging V-ATPase A DNA fragments to create a hairpin structure. Two pac sites were introduced into hpRNAs to aid packaging when coexpressed with the MS2 fusion protein (consisting of the TAT peptide and a dimer of the MS2 coat protein) in E. coli strain HT115 (DE3) competent cells that lack RNase III. The expression system utilizes a single plasmid featuring two T7 promoter-driven expression cassettes: (i) the hpRNA construct and (ii) the TAT-fused MS2 protein (Figure S2).

Following the isolation of single colonies, the transformed bacteria were cultured in Luria–Bertani (LB) medium with agitation for 16 h at 37 °C. Subsequently, 1 mL of the culture broth was transferred to 100 mL of fresh LB medium containing antibiotics until it reached the exponential growth phase of bacteria (OD600 = 0.6–0.8). Induction of T7 RNA polymerase expression was achieved by adding 0.6 mM IPTG (final concentration), followed by an incubation period at 37 °C for 5 h. Bacterial cultures without IPTG served as controls and were subjected to the same incubation conditions. After centrifugation at 7,000 g for 10 min, the bacteria were harvested for total RNA and protein extraction. To verify hpRNA expression, total RNA was extracted from bacterial samples using the RNAiso plus Reagent (TransGen Biotech, China) following the manufacturer’s guidelines. All samples were treated with DNase I and RNase A. Noninduced cultures served as negative controls. Analysis of the isolated RNAs by native agarose gel electrophoresis (1%) revealed distinct bands corresponding to hpGFP, hpATPaseA and hpATPaseD. Total native soluble proteins were prepared using bacterial cultures by centrifugation at 5,000 g and 4 °C for 7 min. The pellets were resuspended in 0.2 mL lysis buffer (140 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 1.8 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.3) and kept on ice for 10 min. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 13,000 g and 4 °C for 10 min, and stored at −80 °C for SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis. The anti-MS2 coat protein antibody was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (product number: ABE76-IM), and the anti-HIV1 TAT antibody was purchased from Abcam (product number: ab43014). Moreover, the bacterial liquid was diluted 100-fold to determine the bacteria count using a Hemocytometer (Chamber Neubauer-improved) after 5 h of IPTG induction.

2.6 Purification of MS2-VLPs and Transmission Electron Microscopy

Purification of MS2-VLPs was carried out as described by Jiang et al. with some modifications. Bacterial cultures induced with IPTG for 12 h were then centrifuged at 4 °C, 7,000 g for 10 min. The bacterial cultures (1 L) were harvested by centrifugation, resuspended in a E. coli cell lysis buffer (Cellregen, Beijing, China) supplemented with 10 mM PMSF at a ratio of bacteria (g) to cell lysis buffer (mL) of 1:10. The homogenate was obtained after freeze–thawing for three time and was then centrifuged at 4 °C and 11,000 g for 1 h. For further purification, the supernatant was loaded onto a sucrose gradient (20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%), centrifuged at 4 °C and 100,000 g for 3 h, and then concentrated with the Ultra centrifugal filter unit (30 kDa cutoff) (Millipore, USA). The purified MS2-VLPs were stored at −80 °C for transmission electron microscopy analysis.

Purified MS2-VLPs were adsorbed on a grid for 1 min, stained with uranyl acetate for 30 s, washed with PBS buffer three times, and naturally dried before observation in a 120 kV transmission electron microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Purified hpRNAs were used as controls. For particle size distribution analysis, 60–80 well-resolved particles were randomly selected from Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images, and their diameters were measured using ImageJ and visualized with GraphPad Prism.

2.7 Analysis of Encapsulated hpRNA inside MS2-VLPs

The bacteria expressing MS2, MS2-hpGFP, MS2-hpATPaseA, and MS2-hpATPaseD were induced with IPTG for 12 h before being centrifuged at 4 °C, 7,000 g for 10 min. Cell lysis was carried out with cell lysis buffer (Cellregen, Beijing, China) as mentioned, and the supernatant of each sample was collected and treated with DNase I and RNase A.

To extract hpRNA from MS2-VLPs, proteinase K was added to the supernatant at a final concentration of 50 μg/mL and incubated at 65 °C for 10 min to digest MS2-VLPs proteins. hpRNA was then purified from the treated supernatant using the GenePrecise Kit (Jianshi Biotech, China) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The extracted hpRNA samples were treated at 90 °C for 10 min and then immediately placed on ice to eliminate secondary structures. The MS2-VLPs samples from bacteria expressing MS2, MS2-hpGFP, MS2-hpATPaseA, and MS2-hpATPaseD, along with the extracted hpGFP, hpATPaseA, and hpATPaseD from MS2-VLPs samples, were loaded on a 1% native agarose gel to confirm the successful packaging of hpGFP, hpATPaseA, and hpATPaseD inside the MS2-VLPs.

2.8 Microinjection of Purified hpRNAs and Encapsulated hpRNAs in MS2-VLPs to Fall Webworm Larvae

In order to test the efficiency of MS2-VLPs in controlling fall webworm larvae, the purified hpRNAs (hpGFP and hpATPaseA) and the encapsulated hpRNAs within the MS2-VLPs (MS2-hpGFP and MS2-hpATPaseA) were investigated. The samples (purified hpRNAs: ∼1 μg/μL, 2 μL; and encapsulated hpRNA within MS2-VLP: ∼0.6 μg hpRNA/μL, 3 μL) were subsequently microinjected between the fourth and fifth abdominal segments of every third-instar larva using a microinjector (Hamilton). Thirty uniformly aged third instar larvae were gathered and placed in individual Petri dishes (9 cm in diameter) for continuous feeding on artificial diet. Each treatment had three replicated Petri dishes. All Petri dishes were housed in an incubator set at 26 ± 1 °C, with a relative humidity of 65 ± 5% and a light/dark cycle of 14:10 h. The number of surviving larvae and their weight were documented every day for 1 week, and photographs were taken after injection for 7 days. Larvae samples were collected at 12, 24, 48, and 72 h postinjection for the analysis of target gene expression levels.

2.9 Stability Analysis of hpRNA Encapsulated in MS2-VLPs

The protective effect of MS2-VLPs on hpRNAs was investigated by freeze–thawing bacteria that expressing MS2, hpGFP, hpATPaseA, or MS2-hpATPaseA, and incubating them with a mixture of intestinal fluid and hemolymph of H. cunea. The combination of intestinal fluid and hemolymph was obtained by decapitating the larvae and pipetting the fluid into prechilled EP tubes on ice. The bacteria were harvested, resuspended in the cell lysis buffer at a ratio of bacteria (g) to sterilization solution (mL) of 1:10, and stored at −20 °C. Upon freeze–thawing for three times, the solution was centrifuged at 4 °C at 12,000 g. The supernatants from bacteria expressing MS2, hpGFP, hpATPaseA, and MS2-hpATPaseA were treated with DNase I and RNase A before individually coincubated with the mixture of intestinal fluid and hemolymph for 1 h (volume ratio: 1:1). Subsequently, all samples were loaded with loading buffer and subjected to electrophoresis analysis.

To assess the protective duration of MS2-VLPs on hpRNA when applied to poplar leaves, 200 μL of frozen bacteria (1 × 1010 cfu/mL) expressing hpGFP, MS2, hpATPaseA, and MS2-hpATPaseA were sprayed on 12 small poplar leaves for sampling purposes. The entire leaves were collected at intervals of 12, 24, 48, and 72 h for total RNA extraction. A total of 1 μg of RNA from each sample was loaded for electrophoresis. Additionally, absolute qRT-PCR was conducted to quantify the residual hpRNA on the poplar leaves.

2.10 Relative and Absolute Transcript Measurement Using RT-qPCR

Relative RT-qPCR was employed to assess the expression of target genes post dsRNA injection or ingestion in H. cunea. To this end total RNA was extracted from insect samples using the RNAiso plus Reagent (TransGen Biotech, China) following the manufacturer’s guidelines. cDNA was synthesized using the Evo M-MLV Reverse Transcription Kit (Accurate Biology, China), which includes a gDNA removal reagent to eliminate genomic DNA contamination prior to reverse transcription. The RT-qPCR analysis was carried out using the SYBR Green Pro Taq HS Premixed qPCR Kit (Accurate Biology, Hunan, China) in a 20 μL reaction volume. The reaction was performed in LightCycler 480 Instrument II (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Each reaction comprised 10 μL of 2 × SYBR Green Pro Taq HS Premix (SYBR Green) solution, 0.4 μL of forward and reverse primers at a final concentration of 0.2 μM each, 7.2 μL of nuclease-free water, and 2 μL of undiluted cDNA. EIF4A was chosen as the reference gene for normalization in the RT-qPCR analysis. Melting curve analysis was performed after amplification to confirm the specificity of each primer pair, followed by the calculation of relative expression levels using the 2–ΔΔCt method.

Absolute RT-qPCR was employed to analyze the accumulation levels of hpATPaseA in E. coli, the remaining quantities of hpATPaseA postspraying frozen E. coli expressing hpATPaseA or MS2-hpATPaseA on poplar leaves, and the ingestion levels of hpATPaseA by insects through dietary intake. For the generation of standard curves, hpATPaseA fragment digested from hpATPaseA cassette containing plasmid pWH2 (Figure S2), were utilized to amplify a 203-bp GA20 intron fragment (Figure S4). The resulting standard curves were established using a eight-point dilution series (15 ng/μL, 1.5 ng/μL, 0.15 ng/μL, 0.015 ng/μL, 0.0015 ng/μL, 0.00015 ng/μL, 0.000015 ng/μL and 0.0000015 ng/μL) of reference samples, and 2 μL purified hpATPaseA fragments of these eight-point dilution series were used as templates for the standard curve. The cycle threshold value of the RT–qPCR was plotted on the y-axis, while the logarithm of the mass concentration of the 203-bp GA20 intron fragment in the RT–qPCR template was plotted on the x-axis.

2.11 Artificial Diet Feeding Bioassay

To evaluate the efficiency of recombinant bacteria expressing hpRNA with or without the viral particle encapsulation on H. cunea, three bacterial concentrations (1 × 1010 cfu/mL, 5 × 109 cfu/mL, and 2.5 × 109 cfu/mL) were introduced into the freshly prepared artificial diet. The solid artificial diet was cut into 1 × 1 × 0.5 cm blocks and saturated with 100 μL of the bacterial cultures. Thirty uniformly aged third instar larvae were gathered and placed in individual Petri dishes (9 cm in diameter) for continuous feeding on a bacteria-soaked artificial diet until pupation. Each treatment had three replicated Petri dishes. All Petri dishes were housed in an incubator set at 26 ± 1 °C, with a relative humidity of 65 ± 5% and a light/dark cycle of 14:10 h. The artificial diet containing the bacterial solution was resupplied daily. The number of surviving larvae and their weight were documented every 3 days. Larvae samples were collected every 2 days for the analysis of target gene expression levels. Photographs were taken after 14 days of continuous feeding. Subsequently, the pupation rate was calculated after all larvae had pupated.

2.12 In Silico Off-Target Prediction Based on Gene Sequences

To evaluate the potential risk posed by sprayed hpATPaseA on NTOs, the poplar defoliators C. restitura (Walker) and P. versicolora (Laicharting), as well as the parasitoid wasp C. cunea (Yang), were chosen for subsequent experiments. Genomic data for P. versicolora and C. cunea were retrieved from NCBI GenBank (GenBank accession no. GCA_037013635.1 and GCA_030064505.1, respectively), while transcriptome data for C. restitura was generated through sequencing. Annotated CDSs were utilized for aligning and scanning for potential siRNA hits through BLASTn-short. The 397 bp hpRNA directed against V-ATPase A was cleaved into 377 virtual 21-nt siRNAs, which were subsequently aligned with annotated CDSs (including alternative splicing isoforms) from C. restitura, P. versicolora, and C. cunea using BLASTn-short. , Parameters were set to an e-value cutoff of 1e-5, minimum identity threshold of 70%, and minimum query coverage of 60%, ensuring both specificity and coverage of potential target sites. The count and classification of 21-nt siRNA hits based on matched nucleotides were depicted, and any siRNA sequence displaying at least 15 out of 21 nucleotide sequence identities with the anticipated target gene was identified as a hit. Subsequently, each consecutive siRNA bearing similarities with the same region of the predicted off-target gene was considered a hit. Hits ranging from 17 to 21 nt in length, with a maximum of two mismatches and/or one gap, were chosen for further analysis. The total count of hits was tallied individually for each potential off-target gene.

2.13 In Vivo Risk Assessment of MS2-VLP Encapsulating hpRNA on Nontarget Organisms (NTOs)

To evaluate the impact of recombinant bacteria expressing hpATPaseA and MS2-hpATPaseA on NTOs such as C. restitura, P. versicolora, and C. cunea, we administered high concentrations of naked hpATPaseA or MS2-hpATPaseA to these three species. For defoliators (C. restitura and P. versicolora), they were raised on poplar leaves sprayed with bacteria expressing hpGFP, MS2, hpATPaseA, and MS2-hpATPaseA, while H. cunea served as the positive control. Frozen bacteria (2 × 109 cfu) were evenly applied to round poplar leaves measuring 8.5 cm in diameter before being fed to the larvae. Fresh poplar leaves inoculated with bacterial fluid were replaced daily. The number of surviving larvae was recorded every 3 days, and the larvae weight and feeding area were measured 17 days postfeeding. The feeding area of H. cunea larvae on poplar leaves was assessed on day 10. Each treatment was replicated three times with 90 larvae per treatment (n = 30). Since C. cunea does not defoliate, an equal amount of bacteria was added to a 50% (w/v) sucrose solution for feeding, which was renewed every 5 days. To verify the consumption of the sucrose solution by C. cunea, a control group without sucrose solution was included. Approximately 200 C. cunea were reared in a 50 mL centrifuge tube, with three replicates per treatment. All insects were kept in Petri dishes (9 cm diameter) or centrifuge tubes and placed in an artificial climate chamber set at 26 ± 1 °C, with a relative humidity of 65 ± 5% and a 14:10 h light/dark cycle. The morphology of four insects per group was photographed on day 17.

2.14 Statistical Analysis

Statistical analysis was conducted using statistical software (SPSS software, version 19.0). Before analysis, all variables were tested for normality using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. The gene expression data for target gene selection underwent a t-test analysis, with a significance level set at α = 0.05. For other gene expression data (RNAi of RNAi experiments and feeding assays), differences in larval weight, and the quantified damaged leaf area, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Bonferroni’s (for equal variance) or Dunnett’s T3 (for unequal variance) post hoc tests were utilized with a significance level set at α = 0.05. Survival curves were assessed using the Kaplan–Meier method, and the significance between the two groups was determined using the log-rank test.

3 Results

3.1 Selection of RNAi Target Genes in H. Cunea and Identification of dsRNA Internalization Pathway

Four target genes (NDUFVII, ACE, V-ATPase A, and V-ATPase D) were selected based on their essential physiological functions in lepidopteran insects and previously validated efficacy as RNAi targets. To evaluate their potential for controlling H. cunea, we conducted systematic functional analysis using synthetic dsRNA microinjection. dsGFP was selected as a negative control, fourth-instar larvae injected with dsRNA (dsGFP, dsNDUFVII, dsACE, dsV-ATPase A, and dsV-ATPase D). The relative gene expression analysis indicate successful knockdown of the four target genes (Figure A–D). Knockdown of NDUFVII, V-ATPase A, and V-ATPase D significantly reduced larval survival, whereas ACE silencing had no significant effect on larval mortality (Figure E). V-ATPase A and V-ATPase D were selected for further experiments due to their strong knockdown efficiency and pronounced impact on survival, despite no significant mortality difference compared with NDUFVII. Gene expression profiling across larval stages and tissues revealed that both genes are constitutively expressed throughout development and are present in the gut, head, fat body, and cuticle (Figure S3).

1 Selection of RNAi target gene and analysis of dsRNA internalization pathway in H. cunea through microinjection. The relative expression level of V-ATPase A (A), V-ATPase D (B), NDUFVII (C), and ACE (D) genes postinjection of dsATPaseA, dsATPaseD, dsNDUFVII and dsACE in Hyphantria cunea. Data are means ± SEM (3 biological replicates, with 20 larvae per replicate) in A–D, different lowercase letters above the columns indicate significant differences (P < 0.05, student-t test). (E) The survival rate of H. cunea following injection with dsATPaseA, dsATPaseD, dsNDUFVII, and dsACE. The relative expression levels of V-ATPase A (F), Clathrin (G), SIL (H), and Eater (I) genes after RNAi of RNAi experiment, injection of only dsGFP or dsATPaseA was conducted as control. Data are means ± SEM (3 biological replicates, with 20 larvae per replicate) in E–I, different lowercase letters above the columns indicate significant differences (P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s for equal variance or Dunnett’s T3 for unequal variance post hoc tests).

RNAi of RNAi was then conducted to identify the RNA internalization pathway. To this end, the expression level of V-ATPase A was measured to investigate the role of genes related to dsRNA internalization. Clathrin, Eater, and SIL genes are connected to clathrin-mediated endocytosis, receptor-mediated endocytosis and endocytic receptor for dsRNA internalization, respectively. Subsequently, dsRNAs targeting Clathrin, Eater, and SIL genes were selected either individually or in combination ingested with dsATPaseA (as shown in Figure S2). The results revealed that the silencing of the Clathrin abolished the RNAi-mediated suppression of V-ATPase A, indicating that clathrin-mediated endocytosis is essential for dsRNA uptake in H. cunea (Figure F,G). In contrast, the suppression of Eater or SIL genes had no significant effect on V-ATPase A silencing (Figure F,H,I).

3.2 Encapsulation of hpRNA in MS2-VLPs in E. coli

To verify hpRNA expression, total RNA was extracted from IPTG-induced bacterial cultures expressing hpGFP, MS2, hpATPaseA, hpATPaseD, MS2-hpATPaseA, or MS2-hpATPaseD, and analyzed by native agarose gel electrophoresis. Distinct bands corresponding to hpGFP, hpATPaseA and hpATPaseD were observed after digestion of all DNA contaminations and single-stranded RNA by DNase I and RNase A, respectively (Figure A). Moreover, the relative expression levels of hpRNA were quantified using absolute RT–qPCR (Figure S4). Expression of hpATPaseA/hpATPaseD was consistently higher in bacteria producing naked hpRNA than in those producing MS2-hpRNA; for example, the accumulation level of hpATPaseA in hpATPaseA-expressing bacteria reached 400 ng/108 cfu, whereas it was approximately 300 ng/108 cfu in MS2-hpATPaseA-expressing bacteria. The accumulation level of MS2-VPL proteins was determined by SDS-PAGE and Western blot (Figure B). The successful expression of the TAT-fused MS2 coat protein was further confirmed using SDS–PAGE and Western blot probed with anti-MS2 coat protein and anti-TAT antibodies (Figure S5). The results revealed a clear mobility shift of the MS2 coat protein, reflecting the higher molecular weight of TAT-fused MS2 coat protein compared with the coat protein alone.

2 Analysis of hpATPaseA/D and MS2 expression in E. coli. (A) Detection of hpATPaseA/D expression levels following induction with IPTG by electrophoresis on 1% agarose gel. The total RNA was extracted from E. coli and treated with DNase I and RNase A before loaded. (B) Detection of MS2 protein expression levels following induction with IPTG by SDS-PAGE (upper panel) and Western blot (lower panel). Red Asterisks, the MS2 bands. Noninduced bacterial cultures (−IPTG) were subjected to the same incubation conditions and served as control.

To verify successful encapsulation of hpRNA within MS2-VLPs, the viral particles were purified from E. coli expressing MS2, MS2-hpATPaseA, and MS2-hpATPaseD using sucrose gradient centrifugation method. TEM revealed uniform, icosahedral, capsid-like structures in all MS2-based preparations, including MS2-hpGFP, MS2-hpATPaseA, and MS2-hpATPaseD (Figure A–C). These well-defined particles are consistent with the known morphology of MS2-VLPs and confirm successful VLP assembly. In contrast, TEM images of bacterial samples expressing only hpGFP, hpATPaseA, or hpATPaseD in the absence of MS2-VLPs, showed amorphous backgrounds and no discernible capsid structures (Figure D–F), indicating that capsid formation is a result of MS2 expression. In addition, the size distribution of the viral particles generated with 2CP or MS2, demonstrate a clear size differences, which arise from the inclusion of TAT sequence in MS2. Additionaly, the presence or absence of hpRNA did not have impact on the size distribution of the VLPs (Figure S6). In this experiment, the TEM images of all four preparations exhibited monodisperse particle populations with diameters consistent with properly assembled MS2 capsids. TAT-fused MS2 particles (MS2 and MS2-hpATPaseA) displayed sizes of 23–36 nm (Figure S6 E–H), following an approximately normal distribution centered around 30 nm. Non-TAT coat protein particles (2CP and 2CP-hpATPaseA) ranged from 18–31 nm (Figure S6 A–D), also showing an approximately normal distribution with a mode around 24–26 nm. Together, these results demonstrate successful assembly of MS2-VLPs, effective display of the TAT peptide, and robust encapsulation of hpRNA cargo.

3 Encapsulation of hpRNA by MS2-VLPs. Purification of VLPs from MS2- (A) and MS2-hpATPaseA (B), and MS2-hpATPaseD (C) -expressing E. coli and visualization by transmission electron microscopy. Scale bar, 50 nm. E. coli expressing hpGFP (D), hpATPaseA (E) and hpATPaseD (F) were set as controls. Scale bar, 100 nm. (G) Samples of purified MS2-VLPs (1) and extracted hpRNA (2) from previously purified MS2-VLPs were loaded onto a 1% native agarose gel to assess the encapsulation of hpRNA by MS2-VLPs. The extracted hpRNA samples (2) underwent a heat treatment at 90 °C for 10 min, before immediately placed on ice to eliminate any secondary structures. Red Asterisks, the MS2-VLPs bands; red triangle: hpRNA bands; blue triangle: dsRNA bands which was not encapsulated by MS2-VLPs.

Following lysis of bacteria expressing MS2, MS2-hpGFP, MS2-hpATPaseA, and MS2-hpATPaseD, the VLPs were collected and used for RNA extraction. The purified hpRNAs were heat-denatured at 90 °C for 10 min and rapidly cooled on ice to eliminate secondary structures. Both intact MS2-VLPs and their corresponding purified hpRNAs were then analyzed by agarose electrophoresis gel (Figure G). Treatment of the extracted VLPs with DNase I and RNase A degraded DNA contaminations, single stranded RNA and any unprotected loop regions of hpRNA that were not successfully encapsulated, while the double-stranded stem structures (marked with blue triangles) remained intact. After heat treatment, hpGFP, hpATPaseA, and hpATPaseD were detected in the encapsulated RNA samples, as indicated by red triangles on the gel. These results confirm the successful formation of MS2-VLPs (marked with red asterisks) and the specific packaging of hpRNA within the capsids (Figure G).

3.3 Enhanced Stability of hpRNA Encapsulated in MS2-VLPs in E. coli

The protective efficacy of MS2 encapsulation for hpRNA was evaluated by incubating bacterial extracts with intestinal fluid and hemolymph from H. cunea, followed by electrophoretic analysis (Figure A). All samples were pretreated with DNase I and RNase A to eliminate DNA and single-stranded RNA prior to exposure to intestinal fluid and hemolymph from H. cunea. Naked hpRNAs, derived from bacteria expressing hpGFP, hpATPaseA, and hpATPaseD, degraded rapidly in the presence of body fluids. In contrast, MS2-encapsulated hpATPaseA and hpATPaseD remained intact, indicating that the MS2 encapsulation of the hpRNA conferred effective protection (Figure A).

4 Stability analysis for hpATPaseA after frozen transgenic bacteria were sprayed on poplar leaves. (A) Detection of hpATPaseA and hpATPaseD in extracts of engineered E. coli strains (treated with DNase I and RNase A) before incubation with body fluid of H. cunea. CK, IPTG induced transgenic bacteria were incubated with water and then sprayed on poplar leaves. (B) Detection of hpATPaseA in isolated total RNA from leaves sprayed with frozen transgenic bacteria by electrophoresis. Red asterisks, the hpRNA bands; blue triangle: ribosome RNA bands derived from poplar leaves. (C) Absolute qRT-PCR detection for the residue amount of hpATPaseA in isolated total RNA from leaves sprayed with frozen transgenic bacteria. Data are means ± SEM (n = 3), different lowercase letters above the columns indicate significant differences (P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s for equal variance or Dunnett’s T3 for unequal variance post hoc tests).

To simulate field conditions and assess environmental stability, prefrozen bacterial lysates expressing hpATPaseA or MS2-hpATPaseA were sprayed onto poplar leaves, and hpRNA persistence was analyzed over time (Figure B). Gel electrophoresis showed that naked hpRNA from hpATPaseA-expressing bacteria became undetectable by 48 h postspray, whereas MS2-encapsulated hpATPaseA remained visibly intact at the same time point. Further quantification by absolute RT-qPCR confirmed these findings (Figure C). Initially, 8.4 μg of naked hpATPaseA and 6.2 μg of MS2-coated hpATPaseA were applied to leaves. At 24 h postspray, approximately 50% of the naked hpATPaseA had degraded, while around 66% of the MS2-encapsulated hpATPaseA was still detectable. By 72 h, naked hpATPaseA was completely degraded, whereas MS2-encapsulated hpATPaseA persisted. These results collectively demonstrate that MS2 encapsulation significantly enhances hpRNA stability both in insect body fluids and on leaf surfaces under environmentally relevant conditions.

3.4 Control Efficiency against H. Cunea Using MS2-hpATPaseA

Microinjection experiments were conducted to assess the RNAi efficacy of purified MS2-hpRNA and its isolated hpRNA in H. cunea larvae. Third-instar larvae were injected with encapsulated hpGFP/hpATPaseA within MS2, or their respective isolated hpRNAs. Larvae injected with purified MS2-hpGFP or hpGFP showed less than 20% mortality, indicating that neither the MS2 protein nor hpGFP exerted lethal effects on H. cunea. In contrast, larvae treated with MS2-encapsulated hpATPaseA or purified hpATPaseA exhibited significantly higher mortality (Figure A, encapsulated hpGFP in MS2 versus encapsulated hpATPaseA in MS2: P < 0.001; encapsulated hpGFP in MS2 versus purified hpATPaseA: P < 0.001), resulting in 75% and 80% mortality, respectively. Consistent with the survival rates, the expression level of V-ATPase A was significantly suppressed after being injected with MS2-encapsulated hpATPaseA and isolated hpATPaseA at 48 h postinjection (Figure B), accompanied by significant weight suppression (Figure C,D). Although mortality did not differ significantly between purified and encapsulated hpATPaseA groups (Figure A, P = 0.270), larval weight was significantly lower in the purified hpRNA group (Figure C, P < 0.001).

5 RNAi effects of encapsulated hpATPaseA within MS2-VLPs and its purified hpATPaseA on H. cunea. (A) The survival rate of H. cunea after injected with encapsulated hpATPaseA within MS2-VLPs and purified hpATPaseA. Encapsulated hpGFP in MS2 and its purified hpGFP were set as control. Survival curves were assessed using the Kaplan–Meier method (n = 30). (B) The relative expression level of the V-ATPase A gene after injected with encapsulated hpGFP in MS2, purified hpGFP, encapsulated hpATPaseA in MS2 and purified hpATPaseA at 12, 24, 48, and 72 h postinjection, data are means ± SEM (n = 5). (C) The larval weight of H. cunea after injected with encapsulated hpGFP in MS2, purified hpGFP, encapsulated hpATPaseA in MS2 and purified hpATPaseA for 7 days, data are means ± SEM (n ≥ 8). (D) The morphological changes in H. cunea after injected with encapsulated hpGFP in MS2, purified hpGFP, encapsulated hpATPaseA in MS2 and purified hpATPaseA for 7 days. Different lowercase letters above the columns indicate significant differences (P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s for equal variance or Dunnett’s T3 for unequal variance post hoc tests).

Different concentrations (1 × 1010, 5 × 109, 2.5 × 109 cfu/mL) of prefrozen E. coli expressing hpGFP, MS2, hpATPaseA, and MS2-hpATPaseA were used to inoculate an artificial diet to evaluate their control efficiency against H. cunea (Figure ). Across all concentrations, the survival rates of the hpGFP and MS2 group did not differ significantly (Figure A–C; P = 0.459, 0.409, and 0.208, respectively), confirming that neither the MS2 capsid protein nor hpGFP exerted lethal effects. In contrast, larvae treated with hpATPaseA and MS2-hpATPaseA exhibited significantly higher mortality than those in the hpGFP and MS2 controls. Notably, the MS2-hpATPaseA treatment led to consistently greater mortality than the hpATPaseA treatment at all concentration levels (Figure A: P < 0.01; Figure B: P < 0.01; Figure C: P < 0.001), indicating that MS2 encapsulation enhances RNAi efficiency, even under reduced application dosages. Consistent with the survival rates, the expression level of V-ATPase A was significantly suppressed in larvae fed with hpATPaseA or MS2-hpATPaseA across the three different concentrations (Figure D–F). Compared to the hpATPaseA group, the MS2-hpATPaseA group prompted a rapid reduction of V-ATPase A gene at high and moderate application dosages, and maintained lower expression levels at low dosages. Larval weight gain was also lowest in the high- and moderate-dosage MS2-hpATPaseA groups (Figure G–L). In the pupal stage, larvae fed on bacteria expressing hpATPaseA/D and MS2-hpATPaseA/D showed deformed pupae (Figure S7).

6 RNAi effects on H. cunea following treatment with three different concentrations of transgenic bacteria. The survival rate of H. cunea after exposure to high (A), moderate (B), and low (C) concentrations of transgenic bacteria expressing hpGFP, MS2, hpATPaseA, and MS2-hpATPaseA. Survival curves were assessed using the Kaplan–Meier method (n = 90). The relative expression level of the V-ATPase A gene on the first, third, fifth, seventh, and ninth days post-treatment with high (D), moderate (E), and low (F) concentrations of transgenic bacteria. Bacteria expressing hpGFP, MS2, hpATPaseA, and MS2-hpATPaseA were filled with black, gray, orange and pink columns, respectively. Data are means ± SEM (n = 4).The larval weight of H. cunea following exposure to high (G), moderate (H), and low (I) concentrations of transgenic bacteria. In panels D–I, the columns represent treatments as follows: black, hpGFP; gray, MS2; orange, hpATPaseA; and pink, MS2-hpATPaseA. Data are means ± SEM (n ≥ 3). The morphological changes in H. cunea after feeding on bacteria expressing hpGFP, MS2, hpATPaseA, and MS2-hpATPaseA under high (J), moderate (K), and low (L) concentrations after 17 days. Different lowercase letters above the columns indicate significant differences (P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s for equal variance or Dunnett’s T3 for unequal variance post hoc tests).

For the high-concentration bacterial treatment, third instar larvae exhibited over 90% and 85% mortality within 20 days after being exposed to MS2-hpATPaseA and hpATPaseA, respectively. The expression level of V-ATPaseA gene was suppressed by the 3 days of continuous feeding on bacteria expressing hpATPaseA and MS2-hpATPaseA. Furthermore, larvae displayed significant growth retardation starting from the ninth day. In the case of the moderate bacterial concentration treatment, third instar larvae showed over 90% and 65% mortality within 25 days after exposure to MS2-hpATPaseA and hpATPaseA, respectively. The expression of the V-ATPaseA gene was suppressed on the fifth day after continuous feeding on bacteria expressing hpATPaseA and MS2-hpATPaseA, with larvae exhibiting significant growth retardation from the 15th day. Under low-concentration bacterial treatment, the mortality rate of third instar larvae reached 65% and 40% within 25 days post treatment with MS2-hpATPaseA and hpATPaseA, respectively. The expression level of V-ATPase A gene was suppressed on the seventh day after continuous feeding on bacteria expressing hpATPaseA and MS2-hpATPaseA, with the larvae showing significant growth retardation from the 20th day. Comparing these with the moderate and low-concentration treatments, the growth of larvae was notably suppressed after being fed with a high concentration of MS2-hpATPaseA-expressing bacteria (Figure J–L). Similar results were observed with the other target gene V-ATPase D (Figure S8), indicating that MS2 could shield hpRNA from nuclease and thereby degradation, resulting an enhanced RNAi efficiency in H. cunea. To further evaluate the protection of hpRNA by the viral particles, an absolute RT–qPCR was carried out to quantify the intake of hpRNA by amplifying a 203-bp GA20 intron fragment. The quantified amounts of intron indicate that MS2 could safeguard hpATPaseA and enhance its uptake in H. cunea (Figure S9).

3.5 Off-Target Prediction for hpATPaseA

In silico off-target prediction was conducted to assessed the potential off-target effects of foliar-sprayed hpATPaseA on two poplar defoliators: C. restitura and P. versicolora, and one parasitoid wasp, C. cunea (Figure ). All potential targets for 17–21 nt siRNA hits were inspected in the NCBI database for protein identity. In the case of C. restitura, the siRNAs predominantly targeted the Cr_V-ATPase A gene with 78 hits, comprising over 50% of the total hits (137 hits in total). Additionally, 34 siRNA hits were aimed at genes encoding unknown protein products. For P. versicolora, the majority of siRNA hits targeted genes coding for unknown protein products, with only 2 siRNA hits, each with 18 matches, pinpointing the Pv_V-ATPase A gene. In C. cunea, the number of potential target genes exceeded 30, surpassing those in C. restitura and P. versicolora. Notably, the Cc_V-ATPase A gene harbored more siRNA hits than any other genes, with 62 potential hits (223 hits in total).

7 In silico off-target siRNA prediction for three nontarget organisms,Clostera restitura­(Cr) andPlagiodera versicolora­(Pv), andChouioia cunea (Cc). The count of 17 to 21 nt siRNA hits generated from Hc_V-ATPase A targeting various genes inC. restitura­(A),P. versicolora­(B), andC. cunea­(C).

Moreover, a single 21-nt siRNA perfectly matched the V-ATPase A gene inC. restitura, while no 21-nt siRNAs showed continuous 21-nt matches when aligned with CDSs fromP. versicoloraandC. cunea. Multiple off-target sequences sharing hits of 17–21 nt with a maximum of two mismatches and/or one gap for these three NTOs were listed (Tables S3–S5). InC. restitura, 14 CDSs were identified as potential targets for 17–21 nt siRNA hits, with the longest continuous match containing 21 nt. ForP. versicolora, 23 CDSs were considered potential targets, with no continuous match longer than 17 nt found. InC. cunea, 37 CDSs exhibited at least one hit of 17–21 nt potential siRNAs, with the longest continuous match spanning 17 nt. Additionally, there are more siRNA hits with over 19 nt sequence identity or longer continuous matches inC. restitura, which is also a Lepidoptera insect.

3.6 Risk Assessment of MS2-hpATPaseA on NTOs

To further examine the potential off-target effects of MS2-hpATPaseA on three NTOs, we assessed the survival rate, expression level of potential target genes with best hits, larvae weight, and feeding area using a concentration of 2 × 109 cfu frozenE. coli.H. cuneaexhibited a notably high mortality rate after being fed hpATPaseA and MS2-hpATPaseA (Figure A), with significant suppression of V-ATPase A expression observed after 7 days (Figure B). Additionally, compared to the hpGFP and MS2 groups, H. cunea larvae showed reduced weight gain after being fed hpATPaseA for 14 days, with the least weight gain when fed with MS2-hpATPaseA (Figure C, S10A). A significant difference in feeding area among the 4 groups was also observed after 17 days (Figure D,S10B). In contrast, forC. restitura,P. versicolora, andC. cunea, no significant differences were observed in survival rate, expression levels of potential target genes, larval weight, or feeding area (Figure E–O, S10C–H). This suggests that high concentrations of hpATPaseA or MS2-hpATPaseA had no discernible impact onC. restitura,P. versicolora, andC. cunea.

8 RNAi effects of transgenic bacteria on H. cunea, C. restitura, P. versicolora, and C. cunea. (A–D) H. cunea: Survival rate (A), the relative expression level of Hc_V-ATPase A gene (B), larval weight (C), and feeding area (D) after consuming poplar leaves coated with transgenic bacteria expressing hpGFP, MS2, hpATPaseA, and MS2-hpATPaseA. (E–H) C. restitura: Survival rate (E), the relative expression level of Cr_V-ATPase A gene (F), larval weight (G), and feeding area (H) after ingesting similarly treated leaves. (I–L) P. versicolora: Survival rate (I), the relative expression level of Pv_V-ATPase A gene (J), larval weight (K), and feeding area (L) after feeding on similarly treated leaves. (M–O) C. cunea: Survival rate (M), the relative expression level of Cc_V-ATPase A gene (N), and larval weight (O) after consuming 50% sucrose solutions mixed with transgenic bacteria expressing hpGFP, MS2, hpATPaseA and MS2-hpATPaseA, CK, no sucrose solution was provided inside a centrifuge tube. Survival curves were assessed using the Kaplan–Meier method (A, E, I, n = 30; for M, n ≈ 200). Different lowercase letters above the columns indicate significant differences (P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s for equal variance or Dunnett’s T3 for unequal variance post hoc tests), data are means ± SEM (B, F, J, N, n = 4; C, G, K, N, n ≥ 3; D, H, L, n = 5).

4 Discussion

Nanocarriers-dsRNA systems have demonstrated potential in safeguarding dsRNA, offering protection against environmental degradation, improved cellular uptake, and sustainable alternatives to chemical pesticides. In this study, we demonstrated that self-assembling MS2-VLPs can encapsulate hpRNA and significantly enhance RNAi efficacy in H. cunea via an E. coli-based expression platform. While previous research has shown that MS2 VLPs can carry siRNA, microRNA, and mRNA, , our results extend these capabilities to hpRNA (Figure B), broadening the scope of RNA payloads compatible with MS2 encapsulation. Comparable strategies using synthetic nanocarrierssuch as cationic lipids, layered double hydroxide, and star polycationshave also improved dsRNA delivery and RNAi efficiency in various insect species, including Botrytis cinerea, Holotrichia parallela, and Aphis glycines. However, unlike chemically synthesized nanoparticles, the MS2-VLPs-hpRNA system is biologically derived, highly biocompatible, and more cost-effective, making it particularly suitable for scalable, field-oriented applications. These advantages position MS2-VLPs as a promising platform for the sustainable production and delivery of RNA-based biopesticides.

One of the major factors limiting RNAi efficiency inH. cunea is the presence of dsRNA-degrading nucleases, a barrier that can be mitigated using nanoparticle-based delivery systems. In this study, TEM analysis confirmed the formation of uniform, icosahedral MS2 capsids (Figure A–C). Furthermore, the electrophoresis and RT-qPCR analysis showed that MS2-encapsulated hpRNA resisted degradation in insect body fluids and on poplar leaves significantly longer than naked hpRNA (Figure ). Additionally, RNAi of RNAi experiments demonstrated that, akin to other Lepidoptera insects, dsRNA was internalized within gut epidermal cells via endocytosis inH. cunea (Figure ), suggesting that apart from dsRNA degradation, inefficient internalization might be another factor limiting RNAi efficiency inH. cunea. To enhance the penetration efficiency of the MS2-hpRNA, the TAT peptide was engineered onto the exterior of the MS2 capsid. SDS–PAGE and Western blotting confirmed the successful display of the TAT peptide (Figure S5), and TEM further demonstrated the expected size differences between TAT-fused MS2-VLPs and native MS2 coat protein particles (Figure S6). Absolute RT-qPCR quantification of hpRNA intake indicated that MS2 encapsulation protected hpATPaseA and significantly enhanced hpRNA uptake inH. cunea larvae (Figure S9). Together, these results support the conclusion that TAT-fused MS2 VLPs improve both the stability and intracellular delivery of hpRNA, thereby offering an efficient platform for enhancing RNAi responses inH. cunea. Although we were unable to directly visualize VLP uptake in midgut epithelial cells, due to the lack of suitableH. cunea cell lines or reliable labeling methods, future studies employing in situ hybridization in dissected midgut tissues could provide direct evidence of VLP internalization inH. cunea. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that self-assembling MS2 capsids can encapsulate hpRNA, protect it from environmental and physiological degradation, and enhance its cellular deliverypositioning MS2-hpRNA as a promising platform for RNA pesticide development. However, given that unprotected dsRNA is known to degrade rapidly under field conditions, future field trials are essential to assess the environmental persistence and practical efficacy of MS2-hpRNA formulations.

Quantitative analysis confirmed high expression levels of hpRNA in both hpRNA- and MS2-hpRNA-expressing bacteria, ranging from 300 to 400 ng/108 cfu, with naked hpRNA reaching higher intracellular concentrations than MS2-hpRNA (Figure S4). Despite this, the MS2-hpRNA delivery system enhanced RNAi efficacy inH. cuneaeven when relatively small amounts of frozen bacteria were used (Figures and S8). Microinjection of purified MS2-hpATPaseA and naked hpATPaseA (∼2 μg naked, ∼1.8 μg encapsulated; Figure ) resulted in comparable mortality rates, underscoring that the primary advantage of MS2 encapsulation is in oral delivery, where it protects hpRNA from gut dsRNase degradation. In contrast, daily ingestion of lower doses (∼1 μg naked hpATPaseA or ∼750 ng MS2-hpATPaseA) resulted in substantially higher control efficacy for the encapsulated form (Figure ). This advantage is attributable to the superior nuclease resistance of MS2-hpATPaseA, which preserves hpRNA integrity, increases its uptake by gut epithelial cells, and facilitates more effective RNAi processing. At higher hpRNA concentrations, the RNAi machinery may become saturated, resulting in similar levels of gene suppression between encapsulated and naked hpRNA treatments. Nevertheless, the onset of gene silencing appeared faster in the MS2-VLP group, suggesting a possible benefit in response timing even at high doses. Importantly, from a practical standpoint, field application of RNA-based biopesticides is unlikely to reach such high concentrations due to production cost and delivery limitations. Therefore, the enhanced efficacy of MS2-VLP encapsulation at lower doses is particularly relevant for real-world use, enabling effective gene silencing with reduced RNA input.

Evaluation RNAi effects on NTOs is a crucial consideration for environmental concerns, given the increasing awareness of potential off-target impacts on arthropod communities within ecosystems. Although RNAi operates through a sequence-specific mechanism, off-target effects may arise when nontarget species share sequence similarities of 19–21 nucleotides with the target dsRNA. For example, dsSNF7 targetingDiabrotica virgifera virgifera also induced mortality inL. decemlineatadue to high sequence identity. Nevertheless, insect species differ in their RNAi sensitivity, especially through oral dsRNA exposure, which often limits systemic RNAi effects. Current evidence suggests that dsRNA-based products generally exhibit high specificity across insect orders. For example, dsRNA lethal to target pests showed no adverse effects on parasitoid wasp Telenomus podisi, the natural enemy Cvrtorhinus lividipennis, Propylaea japonica or beneficial insect Bumbus terrestris. , Consistent with these findings, our study showed that even at elevated concentrations, neither naked nor MS2-encapsulated hpATPaseA affected the survival of three NTOs: C. restitura, P. versicolora, and C. cunea (Figure ,S10). Sequence alignment further revealed minimal 16–21 nt identity with these NTOs (Figure ). While informative, these NTOs do not capture the full diversity of potential nontarget taxa. Future studies should broaden ecological risk assessments and include field-based evaluations under realistic exposure scenarios to comprehensively assess both environmental safety and efficacy.

Taken together, our results validate the MS2-hpRNA system as an effective and species-selective delivery platform for RNAi-based pest management. The self-assembling MS2 proves nontoxic to three nontarget insect species, effectively shielding hpRNA from nucleases and reducing the degradation rate of hpRNA on poplar leaves. We assert that the MS2-hpRNA expression platform holds great promise for the large-scale production of capsid-coated hpRNA. Further enhancements in the optimization of efficient microbial cell factories and antibiotic-free expression systems will be key to advancing the application of this technology.

Supplementary Material

We thank Dr. Rouhollah Barahimipour from the Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology for all the suggestions and discussions. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (32302454, 32371890, 32272634), the Scientific Research Project of the Anhui Provincial Department of Education (2025AHGXZK40282), the National Key Research and Development Program (2023YFC2604802), and the China Scholarship Council.

The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jafc.5c13240.Experimental workflow for target gene selection; analysis of dsRNA internalization mechanisms; physical maps of plasmid vectors for hpRNA; MS2-hpRNA expression in E. coli HT115; developmental stage- and tissue-specific expression patterns of Hyphantria cunea V-ATPase A and V-ATPase D genes; quantification of hpRNA accumulation in transgenic bacteria expressing hpATPaseA; hpATPaseD; MS2-hpATPaseA; MS2-hpATPaseD; confirmation of TAT peptide display on the MS2 capsid surface; transmission electron microscopy images; particle size distribution of TAT-fused MS2 virus-like particles; native MS2 coat protein particles; effects of RNA interference on pupation after feeding with different recombinant E. coli strains; RNAi responses of H. cunea larvae to three concentrations of transgenic bacteria; quantified intake of hpRNA through oral feeding; morphology of four insect species (H. cunea; C. restitura; P. versicolora; C. cunea) after feeding on poplar leaves or 50% sucrose solutions with transgenic bacteria; corresponding leaf disk or sucrose feeding substrates (PDF)

⊥ M.W. and W.L. contributed equally to this work. M.T.W., L.C., and L.W.Z. conceptualized the research; M.T.W., W.H.L., and L.W.Z. designed the experiments; M.T.W., J.Y.B., and T.Z.G. designed the bioinformatics; M.T.W., W.H.L., C.M.J., B.Y.W., Y.M., and F.L. performed the experiments; M.T.W., W.H.L., C.M.J., J.Z., L.C., and L.W.Z. analyzed the data; M.T.W. and W.H.L. wrote the manuscript; J.Z., L.C., and L.W.Z. revised the text.

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Abbreviations

VLPs Virus-like particles

RNAi RNA interference

dsRNA Double-strand RNA

hpRNA Hairpin RNA

CPPs Cell-penetrating peptides

TAT Trans-Activator of Transcription

NTOs Nontarget organisms

NDUFVII NADH dehydrogenase ubiquinone flavoprotein 2

ACE Acetylcholinesterase

V-ATPase A V-type proton ATPase subunit A

V-ATPase D V-type proton ATPase subunit D

SIL Systemic RNA interference deficient-1-like

siRNA Small interference RNA

TEM Transmission electron microscopy.


Lv J. Meng Z. Deng Y. Zhang C. Tao M. Yan S. Active volatile components of the preferred hosts are potential attractants to Hyphantria cunea adults Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 2024 202 105910 10.1016/j.pestbp.2024.105910 38879293
Rong J. I. Yu X. B. Hai L. X. Xiang G. Z. Mo L. D. Research progress on the invasive species, Hyphantria cunea Entomol. Knowl. 2003 40 1 13 18
a Zhao L. Wang W. Effects of autumn warming on energy consumption of diapausing fall webworm (Lepidoptera: Arctiidae) pupae J. Insect. Sci. 2021 21 2 1 7 10.1093/jisesa/ieab021 PMC8023358 33822125
b Wang K. Xu M. Zhao L. Plasticity of life-history traits and adult fitness of fall webworm in relation to climate change Insects 2024 15 1 24 10.3390/insects15010024 38249031 PMC10816995
de Souza R. M. Seibert D. Quesada H. B. de Jesus Bassetti F. Fagundes-Klen M. R. Bergamasco R. impacts and general aspects of pesticides in surface water: A review Process Saf. Environ. Prot. 2020 135 22 37 10.1016/j.psep.2019.12.035
Zhang X. Yang L. Chen C. Shi J. Zhang Y. Sun S. Hesler L. Dynamics of the natural enemy community of Hyphantria cunea (Lepidoptera: Erebidae) in Dandong, China J. Insect. Sci. 2023 23 6 8 10.1093/jisesa/iead105 PMC10684046 38016005
a Su M. Fang Y. Tao W. Yan G. Ma W. Zhang Z. Identification and field evaluation of the sex pheromone of an invasive pest, the fall webworm Hyphantria cunea in China Chin. Sci. Bull. 2008 53 4 555 560 10.1007/s11434-008-0124-9
b Yang Z. Wei J. Wang X. Mass rearing and augmentative releases of the native parasitoid Chouioia cunea for biological control of the introduced fall webworm Hyphantria cunea in China Bio. Control 2006 51 4 401 418 10.1007/s10526-006-9010-z
a Wang Z. Feng K. Tang F. Xu M. Activation of the host immune response in Hyphantria cunea (Drury) (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae) induced by Serratia marcescens Bizio Insects 2021 12 11 983 10.3390/insects12110983 34821784 PMC8617612
b Wang W. Wang Y. Dong G. Chen F. Development of Cordyceps javanica BE01 with enhanced virulence against Hyphantria cunea using polyethylene glycol-mediated protoplast transformation Front. Microbiol. 2022 13 1 11 10.3389/fmicb.2022.972425 PMC9478556 36118242
Yuan L. Li T. Huang Y. Zhang A. Yan S. Jiang D. Identification and potential application of key insecticidal metabolites in Tilia amurensis, a low-preference host of Hyphantria cunea Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 2024 199 105796 10.1016/j.pestbp.2024.105796 38458667
Zhang J. Khan S. A. Heckel D. G. Bock R. Next-generation insect-resistant plants: RNAi-mediated crop protection Trends Biotechnol. 2017 35 9 871 882 10.1016/j.tibtech.2017.04.009 28822479
Zhu F. Xu J. Palli R. Ferguson J. Palli S. R. Ingested RNA interference for managing the populations of the Colorado potato beetle, Leptinotarsa decemlineata Pest Manag. Sci. 2011 67 2 175 182 10.1002/ps.2048 21061270
Lin Y.-H. Huang J.-H. Liu Y. Belles X. Lee H.-J. Oral delivery of dsRNA lipoplexes to German cockroach protects dsRNA from degradation and induces RNAi response Pest Manag. Sci. 2017 73 5 960 966 10.1002/ps.4407 27470169
Ganbaatar O. Cao B. Zhang Y. Bao D. Bao W. Wuriyanghan H. Knockdown of Mythimna separata Chitinase genes via bacterial expression and oral delivery of RNAi effectors BMC Biotechnol. 2017 17 1 9 10.1186/s12896-017-0328-7 28183289 PMC5301351
Li X. Zhang M. Zhang H. RNA interference of four genes in adult Bactrocera dorsalis by feeding their dsRNA PLoS One 2011 6 3 e17788 10.1371/journal.pone.0017788 21445257 PMC3060817
a Palli S. R. RNA interference in Colorado potato beetle: steps toward development of dsRNA as a commercial insecticide Curr. Opin. Insect Sci. 2014 6 1 8 10.1016/j.cois.2014.09.011 26705514 PMC4688004
b Yan J. Nauen R. Reitz S. Alyokhin A. Zhang J. Mota-Sanchez D. Kim Y. Palli S. R. Rondon S. I. Nault B. A. The new kid on the block in insect pest management: Sprayable RNAi goes commercial Sci. China Life Sci. 2024 67 8 1766 1768 10.1007/s11427-024-2612-1 38782871
Kim Y. I. Kim H. J. Kwon Y. M. Kang Y. J. Lee I. H. Jin B. R. Han Y. S. Kim I. Cheon H. M. Ha N. G. RNA interference mediated knockdown of apolipophorin-III leads to knockdown of manganese superoxide dismutase in Hyphantria cunea Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A Mol. Integr. Physiol. 2011 159 3 303 312 10.1016/j.cbpa.2011.03.022 21458580
Wang K. Peng Y. Pu J. Fu W. Wang J. Han Z. Variation in RNAi efficacy among insect species is attributable to dsRNA degradation in vivo Insect Biochem. Mol. Biol. 2016 77 1 9 10.1016/j.ibmb.2016.07.007 27449967
a Yoon J. S. Gurusamy D. Palli S. R. Accumulation of dsRNA in endosomes contributes to inefficient RNA interference in the fall armyworm, Spodoptera frugiperda Insect Biochem. Mol. Biol. 2017 90 53 60 10.1016/j.ibmb.2017.09.011 28951282
b Zhu K. Y. Palli S. R. Mechanisms, applications, and challenges of insect RNA Interference Annu. Rev. Entomol. 2020 65 1 293 311 10.1146/annurev-ento-011019-025224 31610134 PMC9939233
Zhang X. Fan Z. Wang Q. Kong X. Liu F. Fang J. Zhang S. Zhang Z. RNAi efficiency through dsRNA injection is enhanced by knockdown of dsRNA nucleases in the fall webworm, Hyphantria cunea (Lepidoptera: Arctiidae) Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 23 6182 10.3390/genes1030413 35682860 PMC9181381
Mikel P. Vasickova P. Kralik P. One-plasmid double-expression His-tag system for rapid production and easy purification of MS2 phage-like particles Sci. Rep. 2017 7 1 17501 10.1038/s41598-017-17951-5 29235545 PMC5727534
Fu Y. Li J. A novel delivery platform based on Bacteriophage MS2 virus-like particles Virus Res. 2016 211 9 16 10.1016/j.virusres.2015.08.022 26415756 PMC7114531
Hashemi K. Ghahramani Seno M. M. Ahmadian M. R. Malaekeh-Nikouei B. Bassami M. R. Dehghani H. Afkhami-Goli A. Optimizing the synthesis and purification of MS2 virus like particles Sci. Rep. 2021 11 1 19851 10.1038/s41598-021-98706-1 34615923 PMC8494748
a Wang G. Jia T. Xu X. Chang L. Zhang R. Fu Y. Li Y. Yang X. Zhang K. Lin G. Novel miR-122 delivery system based on MS2 virus like particle surface displaying cell-penetrating peptide TAT for hepatocellular carcinoma Oncotarget 2016 7 37 59406 59412 10.18632/oncotarget.10681 PMC5312320 27449085
b Pan Y. Zhang Y. Jia T. Zhang K. Li J. Wang L. Development of a microRNA delivery system based on bacteriophage MS2 virus-like particles FEBS J. 2012 279 7 1198 1208 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.08512.x 22309233
Green M. Ishino M. Loewenstein P. M. Mutational analysis of HIV-1 Tat minimal domain peptides: identification of trans-dominant mutants that suppress HIV-LTR-driven gene expression Cell 1989 58 215 223 10.1016/0092-8674(89)90417-0 2752420
Zhou Z. Li Y. Yuan C. Zhang Y. Qu L. Oral Administration of TAT-PTD-Diapause Hormone Fusion Protein Interferes With Helicoverpa armigera (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae) Development J. Insect. Sci. 2015 15 1 123 10.1093/jisesa/iev102 26320262 PMC4672221
Cermenati G. Terracciano I. Castelli I. Giordana B. Rao R. Pennacchio F. Casartelli M. The CPP Tat enhances eGFP cell internalization and transepithelial transport by the larval midgut of Bombyx mori (Lepidoptera, Bombycidae) J. Insect. Physiol. 2011 57 12 1689 1697 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2011.09.004 21959108
Jiang C. Fu J. Li F. Xia K. Li S. Chang L. Bock R. Zhang J. Plastid engineering with an efficient RNAi delivery system based on bacteriophage MS2 virus-like particles enhances plant resistance to cotton bollworm Mol. Plant 2024 17 7 987 989 10.1016/j.molp.2024.05.013 38835168
Jiang M. Zhang Y. Jiang C. Zhang J. Chang L. Li S. Administration of coexpressed artificial microRNA and bacteriophage MS2 virus-like particles provides protection against Spodoptera litura Insect Sci. 2025 10.1111/1744-7917.13505 39821964
Zhang X. Fan Z. Zhang R. Kong X. Liu F. Fang J. Zhang S. Zhang Z. Bacteria-mediated RNAi for managing fall webworm, Hyphantria cunea: screening target genes and analyzing lethal effect Pest Manag. Sci. 2023 79 4 1566 1577 10.1002/ps.7326 36527705
a Wu X. M. Yang C. Q. Mao Y. B. Wang L. J. Shangguan X. X. Chen X. Y. Targeting insect mitochondrial complex I for plant protection Plant Biotechnol. J. 2016 14 9 1925 1935 10.1111/pbi.12553 26914579 PMC5069633
b Wang X. Zhao D. Wang Q. Liu Y. Lu X. Guo W. Identification and functional analysis of V-ATPaseA and C Genes in Hyphantria cunea Insects 2024 15 7 515 10.3390/insects15070515 39057248 PMC11277301
c Kumar M. Gupta G. P. Rajam M. V. Silencing of acetylcholinesterase gene of Helicoverpa armigera by siRNA affects larval growth and its life cycle J. Insect. Physiol. 2009 55 3 273 278 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2008.12.005 19135057
a Xiao D. Gao X. Xu J. Liang X. Li Q. Yao J. Zhu K. Y. Clathrin-dependent endocytosis plays a predominant role in cellular uptake of double-stranded RNA in the red flour beetle Insect Biochem. Mol. Biol. 2015 60 68 77 10.1016/j.ibmb.2015.03.009 25863352
b Tomoyasu Y. Miller S. C. Tomita S. Schoppmeier M. Grossmann D. Bucher G. Exploring systemic RNA interference in insects: a genome-wide survey for RNAi genes in Tribolium Genome Biol. 2008 9 1 R10 10.1186/gb-2008-9-1-r10 18201385 PMC2395250
c Xiang S. Tong H. Shi Q. Fernandes J. C. Jin T. Dai K. Zhang X. Uptake mechanisms of non-viral gene delivery J. Controlled Release 2012 158 3 371 378 10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.09.093 21982904
Pinheiro D. H. Velez A. M. Fishilevich E. Wang H. Carneiro N. P. Valencia-Jimenez A. Valicente F. H. Narva K. E. Siegfried B. D. Clathrin-dependent endocytosis is associated with RNAi response in the western corn rootworm, Diabrotica virgifera virgifera LeConte PLoS One 2018 13 8 e0201849 10.1371/journal.pone.0201849 30092086 PMC6084943
Ulvila J. Parikka M. Kleino A. Sormunen R. Ezekowitz R. A. Kocks C. Rämet M. Double-stranded RNA is internalized by scavenger receptor-mediated endocytosis in Drosophila S2 cells J. Biol. Chem. 2006 281 20 14370 14375 10.1074/jbc.M513868200 16531407
Li W. Koutmou K. S. Leahy D. J. Li M. Systemic RNA Interference Deficiency-1 (SID-1) Extracellular Domain Selectively Binds Long Double-stranded RNA and Is Required for RNA Transport by SID-1 J. Biol. Chem. 2015 290 31 18904 18913 10.1074/jbc.M115.658864 26067272 PMC4521010
Wu M. Dong Y. Zhang Q. Li S. Chang L. Loiacono F. V. Ruf S. Zhang J. Bock R. Efficient control of western flower thrips by plastid-mediated RNA interference Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2022 119 15 e2120081119 10.1073/pnas.2120081119 35380896 PMC9169809
Zhang J. Khan K. A. Hasse C. Ruf S. Heckel D. G. Bock R. Full crop protection from an insect pest by expression of long double-stranded RNAs in plastids Science 2015 347 6225 991 994 10.1126/science.1261680 25722411
Livak K. J. Schmittgen T. D. Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2–ΔΔCT method Methods 2001 25 4 402 408 10.1006/meth.2001.1262 11846609
Wu M. Zhang Q. Dong Y. Wang Z. Zhan W. Ke Z. Li S. He L. Ruf S. Bock R. Transplastomic tomatoes expressing double-stranded RNA against a conserved gene are efficiently protected from multiple spider mites New Phytol. 2023 237 4 1363 1373 10.1111/nph.18595 36328788
Castellanos N. L. Smagghe G. Taning C. N. T. Oliveira E. E. Christiaens O. Risk assessment of RNAi-based pesticides to non-target organisms: Evaluating the effects of sequence similarity in the parasitoid wasp Telenomus podisi Sci. Total Environ. 2022 832 154746 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.154746 35337872
Peabody D. S. The RNA binding site of bacteriophage MS2 coat protein EMBO J. 1993 13 595 600 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1993.tb05691.x PMC413242 8440248
Quilez-Molina A. I. Niño Sanchez J. Merino D. The role of polymers in enabling RNAi-based technology for sustainable pest management Nat. Commun. 2024 15 1 9158 10.1038/s41467-024-53468-y 39443470 PMC11499660
a Galaway F. A. Stockley P. G. MS2 viruslike particles: a robust, semisynthetic targeted drug delivery platform Mol. Pharm. 2013 10 1 59 68 10.1021/mp3003368 23110441
b Li J. Sun Y. Jia T. Zhang R. Zhang K. Wang L. Messenger RNA vaccine based on recombinant MS2 virus-like particles against prostate cancer Int. J. Cancer 2014 134 7 1683 1694 10.1002/ijc.28482 24105486
c Chang L. Wang G. Jia T. Zhang L. Li Y. Han Y. Zhang K. Lin G. Zhang R. Li J. Armored long non-coding RNA MEG3 targeting EGFR based on recombinant MS2 bacteriophage virus-like particles against hepatocellular carcinoma Oncotarget 2016 7 23988 24004 10.18632/oncotarget.8115 26992211 PMC5029679
a Qiao L. Nino-Sanchez J. Hamby R. Capriotti L. Chen A. Mezzetti B. Jin H. Artificial nanovesicles for dsRNA delivery in spray-induced gene silencing for crop protection Plant Biotechnol. J. 2023 21 854 10.1111/pbi.14001 36601704 PMC10037145
b Yan S. Qian J. Cai C. Ma Z. Li J. Yin M. Ren B. Shen J. Spray method application of transdermal dsRNA delivery system for efficient gene silencing and pest control on soybean aphid Aphis glycines J. Pest Sci. 2020 93 1 449 459 10.1007/s10340-019-01157-x
c Jiang L. Wang Q. Kang Z.-H. Wen J.-X. Yang Y.-B. Lu X.-J. Guo W. Zhao D. Novel environmentally friendly RNAi biopesticides: targeting V-ATPase in Holotrichia parallela larvae using layered double hydroxide nanocomplexes J. Agric. Food Chem. 2024 72 11381 10.1021/acs.jafc.4c00084 38728113
a Bachman P. Fischer J. Song Z. Urbanczyk-Wochniak E. Watson G. Environmental fate and dissipation of applied dsRNA in soil, aquatic systems, and plants Front. Plant Sci. 2020 11 21 10.3389/fpls.2020.00021 32117368 PMC7016216
b Parker K. M. Barragan Borrero V. van Leeuwen D. M. Lever M. A. Mateescu B. Sander M. Environmental fate of RNA interference pesticides: adsorption and degradation of double-stranded RNA molecules in agricultural soils Environ. Sci. Technol. 2019 53 6 3027 3036 10.1021/acs.est.8b05576 30681839
Chen Y. De Schutter K. Biosafety aspects of RNAi-based pests control Pest Manag. Sci. 2024 80 8 3697 3706 10.1002/ps.8098 38520331
Bachman P. M. Bolognesi R. Moar W. J. Mueller G. M. Paradise M. S. Ramaseshadri P. Tan J. Uffman J. P. Warren J. Wiggins B. E. Characterization of the spectrum of insecticidal activity of a double-stranded RNA with targeted activity against Western Corn Rootworm (Diabrotica virgifera virgifera LeConte) Transgenic Res. 2013 22 6 1207 1222 10.1007/s11248-013-9716-5) 23748931 PMC3835954
a Ma Y.-F. Zhao Y.-Q. Zhou Y.-Y. Feng H.-Y. Gong L.-L. Zhang M.-Q. Hull J. J. Dewer Y. Roy A. Smagghe G. Nanoparticle-delivered RNAi-based pesticide target screening for the rice pest white-backed planthopper and risk assessment for a natural predator Sci. Total Environ. 2024 926 171286 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.171286 38428617
b Chen S. Luo X. Nanda S. Yang C. Li Z. Zhang Y. Zhou X. Pan H. RNAi-Based biopesticides against 28-spotted ladybeetle Henosepilachna vigintioctopunctata does not harm the insect predator Propylea japonica J. Agric. Food Chem. 2023 71 7 3373 3384 10.1021/acs.jafc.2c08473 36762732
c Taning C. N. T. Gui S. Schutter K. D. Jahani M. Castellanos N. L. Christiaens O. Smagghe G. A sequence complementarity-based approach for evaluating off-target transcript knockdown in Bombus terrestris, following ingestion of pest-specific dsRNA J. Pest Sci. 2020 94 487 503 10.1007/s10340-020-01273-z
