Expression of the bacteriophage T4 DNA terminase genes 16 and 17 yields multiple proteins.

The products of the bacteriophage T4 terminase genes 16 and 17 are known to mediate cutting and
packaging of concatemeric vegetative DNA. We show here that the larger of these genes, 17, yields
multiple protein species. The complex expression of the T4 terminase genes includes overlapping
transcripts, probably initiated from multiple promoters, RNA processing at certain preferred sites
and translation initiation from multiple ribosome binding sites (RBS). Translation initiation from
these RBS may be modulated by inverted repeat (IR) sequences whose folding can be predicted to
differ in different RNA species. In T4 infected bacteria, genes 16 and 17 are probably co-
transcribed from several near-consensus late promoters upstream from gene 16, and processed at
multiple sites. Additional 5' ends of late transcripts are located downstream from a near-consensus
late promoter inside gene 17 and further downstream, unrelated to any known promoter consensus
sequence. The gene 17 transcripts that are initiated or cleaved internally contain RBS for shorter
open reading frames (ORFs) in the same frame as full-length gene product (gp) 17 of 70 kDa. The
truncated proteins, a 59-kDa gp17' and a 45-kDa gp17", are synthesized from cloned gene 17 segments
in which the first gene 17 RBS is deleted. Expression of gene 17 is different in BL21(DE3) or
W3110[pACT7] host bacteria. The gp17' and gp17" proteins are predicted to contain one or more of the
ATPase motifs that are common among large subunits of other phage terminases. They lack a predicted
single stranded (ss) DNA binding motif that is unique the large terminase proteins in T4 gp17, and
that has been implicated in recognizing ssDNA regions in replicating and recombining T4DNA destined
to be packaged. We hypothesize that a truncated gene 17' is an evolutionary precursor of the full-
size T4 gene 17. Its function may have been maintained to allow processive packaging from double
stranded (ds) DNA ends.