Multimodular flavobacterial enzymes specialised in coordinated decomposition of cellulose and alginate in brown algal cell walls.

Brown algal cell walls are complex matrices composed primarily of alginate, cellulose, and fucoidan.
Their depolymerization is important in marine carbon cycling. Although numerous algal
polysaccharide-degrading enzymes have been characterized, most studies focus on breaking down
single, purified polysaccharides, leaving the degradation mechanisms of native cell walls containing
mixed polysaccharides poorly understood. Here we report the integrated modular enzymes involved in
brown algal cell wall polysaccharides (BACWPs) degradation. Using the marine flavobacterium
Aquimarina sp. 2-A2 as a model, we isolated a bifunctional enzyme, CelAly, which integrates a
glycoside hydrolase family 5 cellulase domain and a polysaccharide lyase family 31 alginate lyase
domain within a single polypeptide, enabling the degradation of cellulose and alginate in brown
algal cell walls. In vivo relevance of CelAly was confirmed by upregulation of its gene during
growth on algal biomass. CelAly also contains three distinctive substrate-binding modules (B1, B2,
UKD) that support its multimodular functionality; among these, UKD is notable for its dual
substrate-binding capability. CelAly's modular architecture and interdomain flexibility may
facilitate coordinated degradation of BACWPs. Bioinformatic analyses and biochemical validation
revealed three additional types of such modular enzymes from marine microbes. CelAly and related
modular enzymes are strongly associated with marine environments and exhibit conserved modular
strategy for substrate recognition and catabolism. Thus, these enzyme architectures represent a
previously unrecognized strategy specialised for BACWPs decomposition. This study elucidates the
unique structural and functional adaptations of the integrated multimodular enzymes and highlights
their ecological prevalence among marine bacteria, providing insights into natural biomass
decomposition.