Microbiological and physicochemical quality of raw materials and Cabacinha artisanal cheese: a traditional stretched-curd cheese from Vale do Jequitinhonha, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Cabacinha artisanal cheese is a raw milk stretched-curd cheese produced in the Vale do
Jequitinhonha, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Despite the recognition of its production method as a
significant cultural heritage, scientific data and regulatory standards remain limited. This study
evaluated the microbiological and physicochemical quality of raw milk, fermented whey, brine and
fresh Cabacinha artisanal cheese during rainy and dry seasons. Thirty artisanal cheese producers
were selected from municipalities within the producing region. The average value of somatic cell
count exceeded the legislated limit in dry season, indicating unsatisfactory milk quality. Fermented
whey, brine and cheese presented high counts of Staphylococcus spp., suggesting deficiencies in
mastitis control, cheese handling practices and compliance with good agricultural and manufacturing
practices. Total coliforms counts were high in fermented whey in both seasons and post-stretching
contamination was detected in one cheese sample. Fermented whey exhibited higher counts of lactic
acid bacteria and Escherichia coli in the rainy season. Raw milk presented physicochemical quality
in compliance with the legislation. Fermented whey was classified as acidic in both seasons and
brine chloride concentrations were consistent across periods; however, these conditions were not
sufficient to inhibit the growth of Staphylococcus spp. Cabacinha artisanal cheese was classified as
medium moisture and fatty. Seasonality influenced the microbiological and physicochemical quality of
raw milk, fermented whey and Cabacinha artisanal cheese. The quality and safety of raw materials and
Cabacinha artisanal cheese need improvement through the adoption of good agricultural and
manufacturing practices. The study provided data for health authorities to determine values for
inspection of microbiological and physicochemical parameters.