Preparing Emergency Medicine Residents for the Certifying Exam: A Pilot Study of a Longitudinal Simulation-Based Assessment Program.

The American Board of Emergency Medicine (ABEM) has recently introduced a new Certifying Exam, which
incorporates assessment of performance in a simulated clinical environment. Simulation-based
assessments allow for reproducible, controlled evaluations. The residency program has a
responsibility to prepare residents for the Certifying Exam and to verify resident competency. We
sought to determine the feasibility of a simulation-based assessment program encompassing three
domains (resuscitation, procedural skills, and communication) with assessments against pre-
determined Minimum Competency Scores (MCS) to provide evidence for program director attestations of
competence. Eight stations were chosen based on ABEM's Certifying Exam content, the Accreditation
Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) Milestones, and proposed Entrustable Professional
Activities. Simulation-based case scenarios and assessment checklists were created with standard
settings performed using the Mastery Angoff process. These stations were categorized into three
different domains: resuscitation (Adult Medical, Pediatric Medical, Trauma, and Neonatal),
procedural skills (Direct Laryngoscopy, Cricothyrotomy, and Central Venous Catheter Placement), and
communication (Breaking Bad News). Results were summarized with descriptive statistics. Thirty
emergency medicine residents at an academic Midwestern residency program underwent assessments over
one year. None of the residents achieved the MCS on all eight assessments. Residents achieved the
MCS on an average of 4.24 stations. There was large performance variability, particularly for the
Pediatric Medical (27%-100% items correct), Neonatal Resuscitation (30%-100%), and Breaking Bad News
(31%-100%) scenarios. A greater percentage of residents met the MCS for procedural assessments. This
pilot study demonstrated the feasibility of a simulation-based assessment program designed to
provide objective evidence of clinical competency. Assessment outcomes and associated feedback can
be used by learners to guide the development of educational plans for performance improvement.
Educators can use the resulting data to assess readiness for independent practice, prepare for the
Certifying Exam, and identify content areas that may require additional program-wide education.