Pattern of Prescription of Antibiotics by Dental Clinicians in Tertiary Health Centers: A Cross-sectional Study.

Antibiotics have reduced the severity of infectious diseases, and the mortality due to them has
reduced drastically, but irrational use of antibiotics may result in development of antibiotic
resistance among bacteria. In the absence of full spectrum evidence-based guidelines for the
appropriate use of antimicrobial agents, dentists remain the highly frequent antibiotic-prescribing
group, responsible for 10.4% of all the antibiotic prescriptions with some geographic variations.
The objective of the study was to assess the patterns of prescription of antibiotics among dentists
for odontogenic infections and to correlate the appropriateness of the diagnosis and the antibiotic
prescribed for that condition. The study was conducted at a dental institute of a tertiary
healthcare hospital. The selected patients were enquired about their condition. The prescription
slips of the patients were evaluated for diagnosis and treatment and prescription provided by the
dentist, by the consent of the patient. The comparison of the data collected with the standard
guidelines showed that cumulatively 85% of the cases were prescribed with antibiotics when not
required as per the given guidelines. In the pulp and periapical diseases, 83.9% of the cases were
prescribed antibiotics when not required. In chronic gingivitis diseases, 47% antibiotics were given
for the cases when an antibiotic was not required. In implant placement, fracture, impaction, and
orthodontic extraction, 100% of the cases were given antibiotics, but none of the guidelines
recommended it. This study could help us to understand the reasons and identify the areas of
possible intervention and improvement. Continued efforts to combat antibiotic resistance will
require all prescribers, including dentists, to examine prescribing behaviors for appropriateness
and the effectiveness of guidelines to optimize antibiotic use.