
JOURNAL INFORMATION
==============================
NLM Title Abbreviation: ACS Catal
Journal ID: ACS Catal
Journal ID: cs

ACS Catalysis

EISSN: 2155-5435
pubs.acs.org/acscatalysis

ARTICLE INFORMATION
==============================
PMCID: PMC12814186
PMID: 41561431
DOI: 10.1021/acscatal.5c06753
Article version: 1
Subjects: Research Article

A Multi-Functional Heterogeneous Biocatalyst for the Oxygen-Free Oxidative Condensation of Primary Alcohols into β‑Hydroxy Acids

2755278 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4412-1579 Orrego Alejandro H.
7852531 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0031-1880 López Idania L.
5968573 Andrés-Sanz Daniel
7877099 Fernandez-Pelayo Uxoa
6400581 Iturralde Maialen
3565506 López-Gallego Fernando
† Center for Cooperative Research in Biomaterials (CIC biomaGUNE)Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA) Paseo de Miramón, 182 , 20014 Donostia-San Sebastián , Spain
‡ Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science , Plaza Euskadi, 5 , 48009 Bilbao , Spain
* Email: aherrera@cicbiomagune.es. * Email: flopez@cicbiomagune.es.
Electronic publication date: 2025 Dec 31
Publication date: 2026 Jan 16
Volume: 16
Issue: 2
First page: 1192
Last page: 1210
Received 2025 Sep 22; Accepted 2025 Dec 12; Revised 2025 Dec 11; 2025 Dec 31
Copyright: © 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society
Copyright year: 2025
Copyright holder: The Authors

License: This article is licensed under CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0
License URL: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Keywords: enzyme immobilization; thiolases; dehydrogenases; cell-free metabolic engineering; biorefinery, biocatalysis

Funding: H2020 European Research Council 10.13039/100010663 818089

Funding: Eusko Jaurlaritza 10.13039/501100003086 010-B1/2020

Funding: Eusko Jaurlaritza 10.13039/501100003086 PRE_2021_1_0334

Funding: Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science 10.13039/501100003989 NA

Funding: Agencia Estatal de Investigación 10.13039/501100011033 PID2024-162406OB-I00

Funding: Agencia Estatal de Investigación 10.13039/501100011033 PRE2022-101787
document-id-old-9: cs5c06753
document-id-new-14: cs5c06753
production-flag-MathML-config-version: 3
production-flag-journal-citation-display-style: acs-titles
production-flag-journal-date-display-style: dates-used-rcd-rvd-acc
production-flag-si-avail: yes
document-id-alt-64: e48d40ea4fd94c9acf587738f33baa8a5f8c2187c8610c65da97c4458061055e

==============================
Enantiomerically pure β-hydroxy acids are valuable building blocks in polymer and fine chemical industries. However, biosynthetic routes to these compounds are limited by narrow feedstock availability. Here, we report a confined, cell-free biosynthetic pathway that converts primary alcohols into β-hydroxy acids using a multifunctional heterogeneous biocatalyst. Five enzymes were coimmobilized and spatially organized on glyoxyl-functionalized porous supports: an alcohol dehydrogenase from Bacillus stearothermophilus, a truncated CoA-acylating aldehyde dehydrogenase from Salmonella enterica, a thiolase from Ralstonia eutropha, a (S)-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase from Thermus thermophilus HB27, and a thioesterase from Escherichia coli. The system efficiently transforms ethanol into (S)-3-hydroxybutyric acid, achieving 18 mM of product, a 7-fold yield increase over soluble enzymes (2.54 mM) through a design-build-test-learn (DBTL) approach. Enzyme confinement promotes optimal cofactor gradients, supporting redox balance and driving this thermodynamically unfavorable cascade. The biocatalyst exhibits broad substrate scope, converting esters, aldehydes, and diols (i.e., ethylene glycol, potentially derived from plastic waste) into β-hydroxy acids. Operated in a packed-bed flow reactor, it retained over 50% productivity after 3 weeks. This work advances in vitro biocatalytic cascades using immobilized enzymes to convert simple feedstocks into high-value chiral molecules.

Introduction

The synthesis of chiral molecules by biological processes has been extensively investigated. , One example is the biosynthesis of hydroxyacids, a family of versatile chiral molecules used as building blocks for the synthesis of polymers and fine chemicals. − Specifically, enantiomerically pure β-hydroxy acids are the molecular bricks of industrially relevant biopolymers such as poly­(hydroxyalkanoates) and active pharmaceutical ingredients like the cholesterol-lowering drug rosuvastatin. , Biosynthesis of 3-hydroxybutyric acid (3-HBA) is among the most explored biotransformation targeting β-hydroxy acids. ,,, 3-HBA can also be chemically synthesized by either reducing ethyl acetoacetate, or oxidizing 1,3-butanodiol using metal catalysis. However, these approaches generally exhibit reduced enantiomeric excess and some sustainability issues compared to biocatalytic routes. Alternatively, 3-HBA can be obtained by depolymerization of poly­(hydroxybutyrate) , (Figure A) or transforming different carbon sources like biobased sugars or small organic acids using engineered microorganisms (Figure B). ,, Latest advances in metabolic and process engineering have boosted the titers of 3-hydroxybutyric acid, , as well as widened their chemical diversity by enabling the synthesis of non-natural 3-hydroxy acids from glucose and/or organic acids. ,, Beyond glucose and small organic acids, (S)-3-HBA has been produced from ethanol using engineered yeasts, yet using glucose as cosubstrate to ensure an efficient fed-batch process. Thus, an efficient biotransformation toward 3-HBA using ethanol as the sole carbon source and engineered cells as catalysts remains elusive.

1 Biotransformation of carbon sources in 3-hydroxyacids. (A) Chemical or fermentative depolymerization of poly­(hydroxyalkanoates). (B) Fermentative approaches using native or engineered microbial cells to transform carbon sources into the target product. (C) Cell-free enzyme systems to convert sugars (through endogenous glycolysis/oxidative decarboxylation) and vinyl esters (through abiotic thiolysis) into the target product in batch reactors. (D) Artificial immobilized multienzyme systems to continuously transform primary alcohols into 3-hydroxy acids operated in a packed-bed reactor (this work).

As an alternative to engineered microbes, cell-free systems are gaining relevance as toolboxes for developing more complex synthetic schemes and applying them under nonphysiological conditions. Besides, enzyme engineering enables the development of novel reactions that are not possible with intact microbes, especially under non-natural conditions. − Cell-free systems have enabled the biosynthesis of R and S enantiomers of 3-HBA and derivatives like poly­(hydroxybutyrate) from various substrates. ,− Among these, glucose, small organic acids, and vinyl esters are the most commonly used feedstocks (Figure C). From glucose, 3-HBA is produced by linking glycolysis and pyruvate decarboxylation to a truncated reverse β-oxidation pathway (rBOX). This route involves a nondecarboxylating Claisen condensation of acetyl-CoA catalyzed by thiolases, followed by asymmetric reduction of a ketoacyl-CoA intermediate catalyzed by an NAD­(P)H reductase. The last step is the hydrolysis of the 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA, releasing 3-HBA and coenzyme A (CoA), catalyzed by a thioesterase. In contrast, organic acids are first activated to acyl-CoAs by ATP-dependent acyl-CoA synthetases. These are then funneled into the same truncated rBOX. Vinyl esters follow a different path, though. They undergo abiotic thiolysis in the presence of CoA, yielding acetyl-CoA to prime the truncated rBOX. Acetaldehyde is released in this reaction and acts as an electron donor to recycle the reduced nicotinamide cofactors needed by the reductase. Hence, vinyl esters act as both acyl and electron donors for the biosynthesis of 3-hydroxy acids through an ATP-independent pathway.

Despite progress, using short aliphatic alcohols like ethanol to synthesize 3-HBA through an in vitro anabolic pathway remains a challenge. ,− One major limitation is the higher energy barrier of oxidative acylation required to form acyl-CoAs from these alcohols. This step is key to starting the biosynthetic cascade. The second limitation is the redox imbalance, as the oxidative acylation of alcohols generates excess reducing power, which is not fully consumed during ketoacyl-CoA reduction. This accumulation of reducing power limits the progression of the cascade, thereby hindering the activation of aldehydes by CoA and leading to a premature halt of the reaction. Cell-free extracts overcome this issue using endogenous enzymes by either dissipating the redox excess into the metabolic background, or incorporating engineered redox valves that rewire it into the main reaction. , However, maintaining redox balance with isolated enzymes remains a difficult task and requires precise regulation. Despite these complications, biobased alcohols like ethanol are attractive feedstocks to synthesize 3-hydroxyacids. ,,,

Beyond issues related to metabolic balance, other obstacles limit cell-free biosynthetic pathways: poor protein stability, enzyme compartmentalization, cofactor supply, and cross-inhibition issues, among others. , Enzyme immobilization onto porous carriers emerges as a solution for these obstacles when designing a wise immobilization strategy. There are many examples where immobilization enhances enzyme stability and allows biocatalyst integration into flow systems. − Besides, the spatial organization of multienzymatic systems within porous carriers can also improve intermediate transfer between active sites. − This strategic arrangement can create favorable intraparticle gradients of intermediates and cofactors, enhancing overall reaction kinetics. Furthermore, proximity channeling effects and macromolecular crowding also contribute to enhancing the performance of the immobilized multienzyme systems. −

In this work, we propose the biosynthesis of 3-hydroxy acids from primary alcohols through multifunctional heterogeneous biocatalysts that can be implemented in a packed-bed reactor for continuous operation (Figures D and S1). The process involves an oxidative condensation cascade catalyzed by a cell-free enzyme system immobilized on agarose beads. The cascade begins with two consecutive NAD-dependent oxidations that convert the primary alcohol to its coenzyme A thioester. This acyl-CoA then enters a truncated rBOX pathway to produce the enantiomerically pure (S)-hydroxy acid. The process uses two cofactors, CoA and NADH, which are regenerated during the reaction. However, the stoichiometry creates a redox imbalance in NAD­(H), solved by introducing a redox valve based on a promiscuous dehydrogenase and using acetone as a cosubstrate. The spatial configuration of coimmobilized enzymes was key to maintaining an internal redox balance that steers both the oxidative thioesterification and the asymmetric reduction, driving the overall reaction cascade forward. Herein, we demonstrate that biobased primary alcohols can be valorized to chiral polyfunctional molecules mediated by an acyl-CoA pathway that opens new avenues for sustainable biosynthesis. This approach offers a promising strategy in synthetic biology for building complex chemicals from renewable resources with high precision. To the best of our knowledge, no chemical process can achieve this stepwise transformation with the same precision and simultaneity as this enzymatic system.

Results

Kinetics and Substrate Scope of an Engineered CoA-Acylating Dehydrogenase from Salmonella enterica (ΔNPduP)

The 1,2-propanediol utilization in S. enterica relies on the pdu operon. This operon clusters genes encoding enzymes that convert the diol into propionic acid, along with genes for structural proteins that assemble into bacterial microcompartments (BMCs) to isolate the pathway from central metabolism. One of the enzymes involved in this catabolic pathway is a CoA-acylating propionaldehyde dehydrogenase (SePduP) encoded by the pduP gene. This enzyme catalyzes the oxidation of propionaldehyde to propionyl-CoA using NAD+ as an electron acceptor and CoA as an acyl acceptor (Figure A).

2 (A) Scheme of oxidative thioesterification of aldehydes catalyzed by ΔNPduP. (B) Relative activity of ΔNPduP toward different aldehydes (see panel C and Table S3) at 30 °C and pH 8. The activity toward propionaldehyde (2b) was taken as reference (130 U mg–1). (C) Scheme of all aldehydes used in this work. (D) Kinetic parameters of ΔNPduP toward different substrates and cofactors. aKinetic parameters taken from Lan et al. Data in panel (B) show the mean of two independent experiments, where the error bars represent their standard deviation.

However, this enzyme has never been characterized in vitro for its oxidative (CoA-acylating) reaction. In this work, we envisioned the potential of this enzyme for the ATP-free synthesis of acyl-CoAs through acylating CoA with aldehydes. To assess the capacity of SePduP for oxidizing different aldehydes to acyl-CoAs, we optimized the pduP gene and expressed it in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3). Nevertheless, the wild-type protein was highly insoluble and presented a high tendency to precipitate when purified. Inspired by previous works, we hypothesized that the protein precipitation was driven by the presence of an N-terminal binding domain to assemble SePduP into BMCs. − To confirm our hypothesis and increase protein solubility, we prepared an N-terminal truncated version of SePduP, named as ΔNPduP, where the first 28 amino acids of the N-terminal were deleted in the encoding gene (Tables S1–S2). This gene deletion resulted in a well-expressed protein (ΔNPduP) with a solubility 10-fold higher than the wild-type variant (Figure S2).

With a soluble enzyme in hand, we assessed the substrate scope of ΔNPduP by testing its oxidative activity on a range of aldehydes (Table S3) to synthesize a variety of acyl-CoAs (Figure A). This engineered enzyme exhibited a broad aldehyde scope, showing a specific activity of 130 U mg–1 for propionaldehyde (2b) (Figure B). Using this activity as a reference, ΔNPduP demonstrated moderate-to-high relative activity (>40%) toward short aliphatic aldehydes (2a- 70 U mg–1, 2c- 112 U mg–1, 2i- 98.5 U mg–1, or 2j- 85 U mg–1), but low relative activity (<20%) toward bulkier aliphatic aldehydes (2e- 30.7 U mg–1, 2k- 20.1 U mg–1, 2l- 8.9 U mg–1, 2m- 9.9 U mg–1) and aromatic aldehydes (2f- 18.5 U mg–1 and 2g- 0 U mg–1) (Figure B–C). Following the same trend as the specific activity, the catalytic efficiency (k cat Km –1) toward 2b (2050 mM–1 s–1) was 108 times higher than toward 2a (19 mM–1 s–1) because of the increased K m toward the shorter aldehyde (Figures C and S2). Surprisingly, the catalytic efficiency of ΔNPduP for 2b was 3.7- and 7-fold lower than its efficiency toward 2c (13,883 mM–1 s–1) and 2d (7,497 mM–1 s–1), respectively, despite exhibiting lower specific activity toward these larger aldehydes under assay conditions. This discrepancy is attributed to the higher affinity of ΔNPduP for larger linear aldehydes. The K m values were 1 order of magnitude lower toward 2c and 2d than toward 2b (Figures D and S3). Finally, we confirmed that ΔNPduP prefers NAD+ to NADP+ by a factor of 10, similarly to other CoA-acylating aldehyde dehydrogenases from other organisms. − When comparing the kinetic parameters of the CoA-acylating reaction with those of the CoA-deacylating reactions, we observed that the enzyme generally exhibits a higher K m for short aldehydes (2a) than for short acyl-CoAs (e.g., acetyl-CoA), yet the k cat for acetaldehyde is an order of magnitude higher than for acetyl-CoA (Figure D). Although the catalytic efficiency toward acetaldehyde is lower than that for acetyl-CoA, the CoA-acylating rate will dominate the reaction when the aldehyde is in high excess relative to CoA. In addition to kinetic parameters, we also determined that ΔNPduP presents an optimum pH of 8, retaining over 70% of its enzymatic activity at pH 7 and 9. However, the activity of ΔNPduP decreased below 40% at more extreme pH values (6 and 10) (Figure S4). Regarding the thermal stability, ΔNPduP presents some hints of thermostability as it retained 50% of its initial activity after 2.5 h incubation at 65 °C and pH 7 (Figure S5).

Once ΔNPduP was biochemically characterized, we evaluated its ability to quantitatively synthesize acyl-CoAs from aldehydes. Because ΔNPduP exhibited the highest enzymatic activity toward propionaldehyde (2b), we selected this aldehyde as a model substrate. The enzyme was incubated with 2b and free CoA as a cofactor, along with either excess or substoichiometric amounts of NAD+, and supplemented with either dithiothreitol (DTT) or tris­(2-carboxyethyl)­phosphine (TCEP). These reductants were necessary to maintain the redox state of ΔNPduP. , We achieved 97% analytical yield (A. Yield) of propionyl-CoA using TCEP compared to the 73% obtained with DTT (Figure S6A). We propose that the greater stability of TCEP helps maintain ΔNPduP in a more catalytically competent redox state than when using DTT. Using substoichiometric amounts of NAD+, we coupled ΔNPduP with a water-forming NADH oxidase from Lactobacillus pentosus (LpNOX) as a cofactor regeneration system. We just achieved 20% A. yield and a significant decrease in the pool of free CoA (Figure S6A). As the decrease of CoA concentration was also observed in the reaction controls without the enzymes, we discarded the CoA degradation driven by LpNOX. When inspecting the UPLC/MS chromatograms of the reaction controls (without enzymes), we identified CoAS-SCoA dimers in those reactions with exogenous FAD+ (Figure S6B–D).

Design and Optimization of a Heterogeneous Biocatalyst to Transform Primary Alcohols into Thioesters

Once we confirmed the potential of ΔNPduP to synthesize acyl-CoAs from aldehydes, we attempted to in situ produce these aldehydes by coupling an alcohol dehydrogenase able to oxidize primary alcohols. These in situ-produced aldehydes would be converted into acyl-CoAs by ΔNPduP. This approach allowed us to avoid problems caused by high aldehyde concentrations in the reaction, such as enzyme inactivation through chemical modification, aldehyde evaporation, and nonspecific side reactions. − In theory, this bienzymatic system promotes the sequential double oxidation and thioesterification of primary alcohols to form the corresponding acyl-CoAs.

When we determined the ΔG of the overall reaction cascade, the oxidative acylation of alcohols was slightly endergonic, ΔG = 2 kcal mol–1. Thus, the NAD-dependent oxidative thioesterification of ethanol is 3-fold less favorable thermodynamically than the exergonic ATP-dependent phosphorylative thioesterification of acetate (ΔG = −3.53 kcal mol–1) (Figure A). This ΔG value is rather higher than that estimated for the cellular phosphorylative thioesterification coupled to the pyrophosphate hydrolysis (ΔG = −7.38 kcal mol–1). Hence, the thermodynamics of the oxidative thioesterification highlight the importance of coupling this bienzymatic system with a very efficient regeneration of the NAD+ to shift the equilibrium toward the CoA-acylating reaction.

3 (A) Standard Gibbs free energy changes of each reaction step using eQuilibrator at pH 8, pMg2, and ionic strength of 0.2 M. Formation of acetyl-CoA through oxidative thioesterification of ethanol is shown in orange, and the ATP-dependent S-acylation of CoA is indicated in yellow (in the absence of pyrophosphatase). Numbers refer to the substrate (1: alcohol for BsADH or acetate for ACS), intermediate (2: aldehyde), and product (3: acyl-CoA). (B) Scheme of oxidative thioesterification of alcohols catalyzed by HB-1 series. The * indicates the regeneration of the second NADH produced by ΔNPduP, using the acetone-based recycling system. (C) Oxidative thioesterification of 10 mM ethanol by three different Heterogeneous Biocatalysts (HB-1.1, HB-1.2, and HB-1.3) with different BsADH:ΔNPduP ratios using 50 mM acetone as cosubstrate. (D) Oxidative thioesterification of 10 mM of 1-propanol by three different Heterogeneous Biocatalysts (HB-1.1, HB-1.2, and HB-1.3) with different BsADH:ΔNPduP ratios using 50 mM acetone as cosubstrate. Data in panels (C, D) show the mean of two independent experiments, where the error bars represent their standard deviation.

In this context, we selected the alcohol dehydrogenase from Bacillus stearothermophilus (BsADH) as a candidate because its broad substrate scope allowed the oxidation of primary alcohols. ,, As a recycling system, we discarded the conventional use of FAD-dependent NOX enzymes because of the dimerization of the free CoA. Alternatively, we proposed the reduction of acetone to isopropanol catalyzed by BsADH (Table S4), as an oxygen-independent NAD+ recycling system. Although in our experience, cell-free enzyme systems in solution usually reach higher yields, their application is limited to one reaction cycle, as free enzymes are difficult to reuse for consecutive batch cycles. To increase their operational stability and reusability, we immobilized these two enzymes on porous carriers based on cross-linked agarose microbeads (AG). To find the optimal immobilization protocols for the coimmobilization of these two enzymes, we evaluated four immobilization chemistries. Different agarose-based carriers were functionalized with different reactive group such as; (1) glyoxyl groups (AG-G) for irreversible covalent binding via the ε-amino groups of exposed lysine residues, (2) Co2+-chelates (AG-Co2+) for affinity immobilization through the His-tag of enzymes, and (3) either polyallylamine (AG-PAH) or polyethylenimine (AG-PEI) for ionic interactions with the exposed acidic residues of enzyme surfaces. Also, we tested a triheterofunctional carrier where the agarose beads were activated with (4) aldehydes, cobalt-chelates, and positively charged amine groups (AG-Co2+/G/A). This latter carrier was recently applied to coimmobilize several multienzyme systems. ,

The highest activity and thermal stability for the studied enzymes were achieved under specific immobilization conditions (Table S5 and Figure S7). ΔNPduP immobilized on AG-G resulted in an 18% immobilization efficiency and retained 95% of its initial activity after 7.5 h at 65 °C (Figure S7A). BsADH was immobilized on either AG-G and AG-PEI, showing immobilization efficiencies of 37 and 99%, respectively, improving the results previously reported for AG-Co2+ and AG-Co2+/G/A. However, these new immobilization chemistries reduced the enzyme thermal stability when compared to the soluble enzyme (Figure S7B). According to these results, we selected AG-G as the consensus carrier to coimmobilize the two enzymes. We prepared three new heterogeneous biocatalysts, with different BsADH:ΔNPduP activity ratios; 5:1, 1:1, and 1:5, named as HB-1.1, HB-1.2 or HB-1.3, respectively (Table S5). The heterogeneous biocatalyst with the highest ratio BsADH:ΔNPduP (HB-1.1) rendered the highest acyl-CoA A. yields (Figure C–D). This result demonstrates that the oxygen-independent acetone/BsADH pair is an efficient system for NAD+ recycling in this cascade. As expected, the biocatalysts of the HB-1 series were more efficient in synthesizing propionyl-CoA than acetyl-CoA, given the 6-fold higher catalytic efficiency of ΔNPduP toward 2c regarding 2b (Figure D). In this acetone-driven NAD+ recycling system, BsADH functions as a redox valve. It oxidizes primary alcohols to their corresponding aldehydes when NAD+ is abundant, but reduces acetone to isopropanol when NADH accumulates. This is possible because BsADH presents a 30-fold higher K m toward isopropanol than toward ethanol (Table S4), preventing competition for NAD+ between the oxidation of isopropanol and ethanol. The concept of the redox valve has been previously utilized in others cell-free biosynthetic pathways to surpass the basic cofactor imbalance issue.

Design and Optimization of the Heterogeneous Biocatalysts to Transform Ethanol into 3-Hydroxy Butyric Acid

After developing the HB-1 series for the ATP-independent transformation of primary alcohols into acyl-CoAs, we coupled them with a well-established enzymatic system that sequentially converts acyl-CoAs into 3-hydroxy acids. Herein, the oxidative thioesterification of primary alcohols was coupled to a truncated rBOX pathway. As a model reaction, ethanol was sequentially oxidized to acetyl-CoA by BsADH and ΔNPduP, followed by a nondecarboxylative Claisen condensation of the 2 acetyl-CoAs catalyzed by a thiolase 5 from Ascaris suum (AsTHL5). The resulting acetoacetyl-CoA is then asymmetrically reduced by an S-selective 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase from Thermus thermophilus HB27 (TtHBDH) to yield 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA that is finally hydrolyzed by a thioesterase from E. coli (EcTesB) to yield (S)-3-hydroxybutyric acid (3-HBA) (Figure ). Without redox cofactor recycling, the cascade presents a ΔG = −5.02 kcal mol–1 calculated by eQuilibrator, about four times higher than when the reaction is initiated with either vinyl acetate (ATP-independent) or acetate (ATP-dependent). Moreover, if no NAD+ recycling system is coupled, this cascade is redox unbalanced due to the accumulation of 3 molecules of NADH per molecule of 3-HBA. The thermodynamic analysis underscores the inherent difficulty of synthesizing 3-hydroxy acids from primary alcohols.

4 Scheme of the model reaction to transform ethanol into 3-hydroxybutyric acid (3-HBA) through a 5-enzyme, 6-reaction step system catalyzed by the alcohol dehydrogenase from B. stearothermophilus (BsADH; R1, oxidation of ethanol, and R6, reduction of acetone), the engineered CoA-acylating aldehyde dehydrogenase from S. enterica (ΔNPduP; R2, oxidative thioesterification), the thiolase from Ralstonia eutropha (ReTHL; R3, nondecarboxylative Claisen condensation), the 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase from T. thermophilus (TtHBDH; R4, asymmetric reduction), and the thioesterase B from E. coli (EcTesB; R5, hydrolysis). The undesired hydrolysis of acetyl-CoA catalyzed by EcTesB is represented with a red dashed arrow.

We faced the redox imbalance challenge by investigating the compatibility of the acetone-driven recycling system with the asymmetric reduction of the condensed ketoacyl-CoA intermediate. First, we intended the oxidative condensation of ethanol (1a) into 3-HBA using soluble enzymes and substoichiometric amounts of redox (NAD+) and acylating (CoA) cofactors. Working with soluble enzymes, we observed no production of 3-HBA, yet acetate was accumulated (Figure S8), indicating the undesired hydrolysis of acetyl-CoA (3a). We suggest that oxidative acylation produces and accumulates acetyl-CoA, which is not further converted into 3-HBA. In our hypothesis, the BsADH-driven reduction of acetone likely competes with TtHBDH for NADH, decoupling the oxidative activation module and the condensation/reduction/hydrolysis module. Consequently, EcTesB hydrolyzes the accumulated acetyl-CoA to acetate, a dead-end product that derails ethanol from 3-HBA formation (Figure ). To rescue TtHBDH from this competition, we added glucose and a thermostable variant of the glucose dehydrogenase from Bacillus subtilis (BsGDH) to the system, yet the system failed to produce the 3-HBA and acetate (Figure S8). This points out a competition between BsGDH and the pair BsADH/ΔNPduP for the NAD+, preventing the formation of acetyl-CoA and consequently of its hydrolysis product, acetate.

As compartmentalization was proven successful for a bienzymatic system composed of TtHBDH and NOX in a previous study, we decided to perform this biosynthetic pathway using heterogeneous biocatalysts. To do so, we combined the series of HB-1 composed of coimmobilized BsADH and ΔNPduP with AsTHL5, TtHBDH, and EcTesB coimmobilized on AG-Co2+ (HB-2). Using this combination, we detected 3-HBA (0.240 ± 0.001 mM) and acetate (3.8 ± 0.1 mM) at very low titer though (Figure S9). The compartmentalization of the oxidative activation module and the condensation/reduction/hydrolysis module succeeded in yielding (S)-3-HBA according to the exquisite selectivity of TtHBDH previously reported. As both 3-HBA and acetate were detected using 1 mM of NAD+, the NAD+ was recycled at least 7 times according to the pathway stoichiometry (3 and 2 mol of NAD+ per mol of 3-HBA and acetate, respectively). This was an encouraging starting point to optimize the multifunctional heterogeneous biocatalyst.

When we increased the ethanol concentration from 50 to 200 mM, we achieved a 10-fold increase in 3-HBA titer using the same spatial configuration. By testing the HB-1 series in combination with HB-2, we unexpectedly found that HB-1.3 with the less optimal BsADH:ΔNPduP (1:5) activity ratio for acyl-CoA biosynthesis was the most efficient heterogeneous biocatalyst for the 3-HBA production, achieving a maximum titer of 4.0 ± 0.2 mM 3-HBA and 15.30 ± 0.06 mM acetate (Figure A). HB-1.1, which achieved the higher acyl-CoA yield, produced 2.16 ± 0.02 mM 3-HBA, 2-fold less 3-HBA titer than HB-1.3. One limitation of this system is the reversibility of the interactions established between the His-tagged enzymes and the carrier in HB-2, which might limit the overall operational stability of the system due to enzyme leaching issues. To maximize the operational stability of this multifunctional heterogeneous biocatalyst, we intended the coimmobilization of the 5 enzymes first on AG-Co2+ through their His-tags (HB-3), and then on AG-G. Unfortunately, HB-3 failed to produce 3-HBA but accumulated acetate, suggesting impaired activity of either AsTHL5 or TtHBDH, disrupting the progression of the cascade. Likewise, AsTHL5 was fully inactivated when immobilized on AG-G, precluding the fabrication of this heterogeneous biocatalyst. As an alternative, we decided to replace AsTHL5 with a thiolase from R. eutropha (ReTHL) since this enzyme was reported to be efficiently immobilized on AG-G. Hence, we coimmobilized ReTHL, TtHBDH, and EcTesB on AG-G, resulting in HB-4, which was mixed with HB-1.3, where BsADH and ΔNPduP were also coimmobilized through the glyoxyl chemistry. This combination of heterogeneous biocatalysts increased the 3-HBA titer up to 6.52 ± 0.08, a 63% higher 3-HBA titer compared to that achieved by HB-1.3 and HB-2 (containing AsTHL5 on AG-Co2+) (4.0 ± 0.2 mM) (Figure A,B). Thus, the combination of a new thiolase with a more stabilizing immobilization chemistry improved the throughput of the immobilized biosynthetic cascade. − Herein, the five enzymes were immobilized using the same chemistry but were physically segregated, having the oxidative acylation module in one particle and the condensation/reduction/hydrolysis module in another. To improve their spatial localization, we coimmobilized all five enzymes on AG-G, fabricating a new biocatalyst named HB-5.1. This multifunctional heterogeneous biocatalyst produced 7.86 ± 0.029 mM 3-HB (Figure B), increasing the target titer by 20% compared to the system immobilized separately (HB-1.3 + HB-4).

5 Effect of enzyme spatial distribution on the performance of multifunctional heterogeneous biocatalysts. (A) 3-HBA (purple) and acetate (gray) titers from different combinations of heterogeneous biocatalysts (HB) using AsTHL5 as thiolase. Twenty-five mg of each HB was resuspended in the reaction mixture with a ratio of 1/5 (w/v). (B) 3-HBA (purple) and acetate (gray) titers from different combinations of heterogeneous biocatalysts using ReTHL as thiolase. Twenty-five mg of each HB was resuspended in the reaction mixture with a ratio of 1/5 (w/v). (C, D) Single-particle analysis of the heterogeneous biocatalysts after 22 h of reaction. The system includes either HB-1.3 labeled with Rhodamine B isocyanate (RhB, shown in red) combined with HB-4 (C), or HB-5.1. The left images show the autofluorescence of NADH in blue, while the right images show either the overlay of the brightfield and the Rhodamine B attached to HB-1.3 in red (C) or just the brightfield (D). (E) 3-HBA (purple) and acetate (gray) titers, as well as the acetate/3-HBA ratio (black dots) obtained with either the immobilized system (HB5 series with different enzyme loadings (see Table S6)) or the soluble ones operated with different CoA and acetone concentrations. 40 mg of each HB was mixed with the reaction mix in a ratio of 1/5 (w/v). The soluble reactions were carried out as described in the Methods section. (F) Bulk (outside particle) and intraparticle (inside particle) NAD+, NADH, CoA, and acetyl-CoA concentrations of the reaction catalyzed by HB-5.2, and the cofactor concentration in the reaction bulk catalyzed by the homogeneous reaction with pure enzymes (homogeneous reaction). Cofactor concentration was determined by UPLC/MS as indicated in the Methods section. (G) Merged Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy (CLSM) 40× image of HB-5.2 formed by one unlabeled enzyme (ReTHL) and the left 4 enzymes labeled with compatible fluorophores; BsADH (RhB, λex: 561 nm, orange color); ΔNPduP (Atto 390, λex: 405 nm, blue color), EcTesB (FTIC; λex: 488 nm), and TtHBDH (A647, λex: 633 nm, red color) obtained from HB-5.2. The scheme on the right represents the proposed extraparticle and intraparticle diffusion paths for all intermediates involved in the biosynthetic cascade.

To better understand how spatial organization affects pathway performance, we quantified all intermediates via UPLC/MS after 16 h at 30 °C. For CoA intermediates, only free CoA and acetyl-CoA were detected. The CoA/acetyl-CoA ratio was close to 1 in reactions yielding the highest 3-HBA titers (Figure S10). UPLC analysis also revealed the presence of both NAD redox species at the end of the reaction, with a molar excess of NAD+ over NADH ranging from 30 to 5. Higher titers correlated with a 20-fold molar excess of NAD+ over NADH (Figure S10). Redox balance reached a pseudosteady state, with NADH levels stabilizing at 40 μM, driving the asymmetric reduction of the 3-ketoacyl-CoA intermediate. This trend was observed in both coimmobilized (HB-5.1) and physically segregated systems (HB-1.3 + HB-4). Next, we exploited time-lapse epifluorescence microscopy to track the intraparticle NADH density, leveraging its autofluorescence under blue light (Figures C–D and S11). In both reactions, an equilibrium was achieved after 5 h of reaction, similarly to the results obtained with the UPLC/MS analysis (Figure S10C–D). This equilibrium was maintained for 24 h. Interestingly, HB-5.1 presented only one population of particles with similar intraparticle fluorescence density. In contrast, the segregated system (HB-1.3 + HB-4) exhibited two particle populations with different intraparticle fluorescence intensity. The particles with the lowest blue fluorescence (NADH) correspond to those particles labeled with rhodamine (red), corresponding to HB-1.3. As single-particle fluorescence informs about intraparticle NADH concentration, we suggest that in the physically segregated system, NADH is produced in HB-1.3, diffuses into the bulk, and then enters HB-4, where it is accumulated and consumed. In contrast, in HB-5.1, NADH is both produced and consumed within the same bead (Figure C–D). The differences found in the intraparticle NADH concentration explain the variation in 3-HBA titers depending on the spatial configuration of the heterogeneous biocatalytic systems. Hence, this single-particle study confirms bulk results, demonstrating that the intraparticle NAD­(H) redox ratio plays a crucial role in maximizing 3-HBA titer.

Once the best spatial configuration for the immobilized enzymatic cascade was selected, we conducted an in silico optimization using COPASI software as previously done for other multienzyme systems in solution. , Since the software is not designed to model mass transfer in immobilized systems, we simulated the soluble enzyme cascade using the kinetic and thermodynamic parameters of the free enzymes (Table S4). Hence, we created semiquantitative models (Tables S7–S8) to find bottlenecks and predict qualitative information about reaction bottlenecks and optimum enzyme concentrations. We tuned the model to achieve a similar 3-HBA titer under the same reaction conditions and enzyme concentrations used in HB-5.1. We found that ΔNPduP was the rate-limiting enzyme, and that EcTesB acted as a kinetic trap due to its undesired hydrolytic activity toward acetyl-CoA (3a). After parameter scanning of all enzymes (Figures S12–S13). The simulations suggested increasing the ΔNPduP loading and reducing the EcTesB one, keeping an excess of ΔNPduP regarding BsADH. Finally, COPASI models also suggested increasing the acetone concentration up to 300 mM to maximize the 3-HBA titer. Following the COPASI model predictions, we fabricated a new version of this heterogeneous biocatalyst named HB-5.2. The five enzymes were also coimmobilized on AG-G; however, this version contains a higher loading of ΔNPduP and a lower loading of EcTesB compared to HB-5.1.

When HB-5.2 was tested in the presence of 300 mM of acetone as suggested by the COPASI model, we detected 15.7 ± 0.31 mM 3-HBA, a titer two times higher than that achieved with HB-5.1 using 100 mM acetone (Figure E). Next, we intended to increase the total turnover number of CoA by decreasing the CoA concentration in the reaction to 0.5 mM. Surprisingly, less CoA led to an increased titer of 18 ± 0.18 mM 3-HBA, resulting in a TTNCoA of 72. This higher titer reflects improved performance of ΔNPduP, which is inhibited by free CoA (Figure D, K i CoA = 1.3 mM). Despite the thermodynamically unfavorable nondecarboxylative Claisen condensation, the system efficiently accumulates acetyl-CoA and removes free CoA and 3-acetoacetyl-CoA. This enables ReTHL (a biosynthetic thiolase) to drive the reaction forward, preventing it from working in the reverse direction. ,, HB-5.2 also increased the acetate production up to 33 ± 0.03 mM, yet the acetate:3-HBA molar ratio was reduced to 1.86 compared to the 2.2 ratio found with HB-5.1 using 100 mM acetone and 1 mM CoA (Figure E). The reduction of this ratio points out the mitigation of ethanol derailment from the main pathway when the heterogeneous biocatalyst and the reaction media were optimized. Under these optimal conditions, we decided to perform the biosynthetic pathway with the free enzymes. We only detected 2.54 ± 0.037 mM 3-HBA with an accumulation of 21.2 ± 0.47 mM of acetate, which means an acetate:3-HBA ratio of 8.5 (Figure E). When we analyzed the accumulation of cofactors both in the bulk and inside the biocatalyst particles at the end of the reaction course, we found intriguing differences (Figure F). On the one hand, the acetyl-CoA in the bulk was 9 times higher than the CoA concentration, regardless the system was free or immobilized. However, the similar concentrations of these two CoA species inside the beads indicate a gradient of CoA intermediates between the bulk and the particles. On the other hand, the molar excess of NAD+ over NADH was 99 times in the bulk of the reaction catalyzed by the free enzymes. In comparison, on those reactions catalyzed by HB-5.2, the bulk molar excess of NAD+ over NADH was lower, being only 24 times. Even more interesting was the fact that the molar excess of NAD+ to NADH decayed to 2.3 times inside the biocatalyst́s particle. This means that coimmobilized enzymes are exposed to a higher NADH concentration than free ones, which can enhance the asymmetric reduction of the acetoacetyl-CoA intermediate. Thus, differences in cofactor concentrations between the bulk phase and the interior of the heterogeneous biocatalyst give rise to intermediate gradients that cannot form in the corresponding soluble system. These gradients may explain why the immobilized system outperforms the soluble one. To gain deeper insight into the formation of these gradients at the microscopic level, we analyzed the spatial organization of the five enzymes across the surface of the porous carrier forming HB-5.2. Using confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM), we performed colocalization studies with enzyme samples spiked with fluorophore-labeled enzymes (Figures G and S14). According to the infiltration profile and the Pearson coefficient, BsADH and ΔNPduP colocalized at the outer surface of the biocatalysts (Figure S15). Contrarily, ReTHL, TtHBDH, and EcTesB were infiltrated to a greater extent inside the HB-5.2 particle, resulting in a lower degree of colocalization between them. Based on the intraparticle enzyme segregation and cofactor gradients described above, we propose a diffusion path where the NAD+ and CoA from the bulk first encounter the oxidative activation module, accumulating acetyl-CoA and NADH inside the beads, where the downstream enzymes are localized (Figure G). This spatial organization enhances the throughput of the cascade through a suitable diffusion gradient of intermediates, otherwise impossible using free enzymes. This result is supported by our initial attempts under nonoptimized conditions, where free enzymes produced no 3-HBA from ethanol. Therefore, the coimmobilization of this 5-enzyme system provides a suitable confined environment to create gradients of intermediates, pushing the pathway toward the final product, and minimizing intermediate derailments. Hence, the cofactor imbalance within the enzymatic system is resolved through the strategic spatial arrangement of confined enzymes. This setup mimics the spatial organization of biosynthetic pathways in the cell milieu, enabling out-of-equilibrium reaction cascades and overcoming thermodynamic barriers.

Scope of HB-5.2 toward Esters, Aldehydes, and Primary Alcohols

After the optimization of a heterogeneous biocatalyst (HB-5.2) to maximize the titer of 3-HBA from ethanol, we assessed its scope to transform other starting materials to ultimately produce 3-HBA. Using 50 mM of either precursors (esters) or derivatives (aldehydes) of ethanol and HB-5.2 at 20% (w:v) catalyst load, we determined the 3-HBA titers (Figure A). Starting from acetaldehyde and vinyl acetate (an ester that, upon abiotic thiolysis with CoA, produces acetyl-CoA and acetaldehyde), the titers were limited to 0.19 or 1.6 mM 3-HBA, respectively. On the contrary, when pure ethyl acetate is used as substrate in the presence of an immobilized lipase (Novozyme 435) together with HB-5.2, both acetate and ethanol are released, and the ethanol is sequentially converted into up to 6.6 ± 0.03 mM of 3-HBA. The titer from the ethyl ester was slightly higher than starting from ethanol under the same reaction conditions and biocatalyst loads. Using ethyl acetate as a starting material captured our interest as this solvent is used for the isolation of 3-HBA in other cell-free biosynthetic cascades. To evaluate the recyclability of this ethyl acetate, we decided to isolate the 3-HBA produced from ethanol using ethyl acetate. Then, the solvent was evaporated and reused as the starting material to again produce 3-HBA. Remarkably, HB-5.2 produced 5.45 mM of 3-HBA from 50 mM of recycled ethyl acetate (Figure A). This titer was similar to that achieved with fresh ethyl acetate, demonstrating the capacity of this heterogeneous biocatalyst to upcycle postused ethyl acetate in downstream processing. The use of biocatalysis to upcycle solvents is rare, yet some examples have been reported to valorize green solvents like cyrene and racemic ethyl glyceryl ether into pharmaceutical precursors. , Here, we add one more example to this collection, valorizing the widely used ethyl acetate into an enantiomerically pure 3-HBA. Additionally, we also tested bioethanol derived from agricultural waste as a starting material (>99.5% purity with traces of superior alcohols). Using 200 mM of this biobased substrate, we produced 18.8 ± 2.1 mM of 3-HBA, a similar titer to that obtained with pure ethanol (Figure A).

6 (A) 3-HBA (purple) and acetate (gray) titers from different starting materials using HB-5.2 as biocatalyst. *Recycled ethyl acetate from product purification. #Advanced bioethanol from biomass. All starting materials were added to a final initial concentration of 50 mM plus 75 mM acetone, except bioethanol, which was added to a final concentration of 200 mM with 300 mM acetone. (B) Biosynthesis of 3-hydroxy acids starting from a mix of 180 mM ethylene glycol and 20 mM ethanol. (C) Biosynthesis of 3-hydroxy acids starting from a mix of 180 mM 1-propanol and 20 mM ethanol. For each reaction described in panels A-C, 40 mg of HB-5.2 were resuspended in the corresponding reaction mix at a ratio of 1:5 (w/v). Additionally, the reactions starting from ethyl acetate also contained 5 mg of Novozyme 435. Reactions were carried out as described in the Methods section. (D) Batch reaction cycles for the biosynthesis of 3-HBA (purple squares) and acetate (gray squares) with HB-5.2 from ethanol. Acetate/3-HBA molar ratio is represented in black circles. Reactions were triggered by adding 1 mL of the reaction mixture with 200 mM ethanol and 300 mM acetone to 200 mg of HB-5.2 and incubating for 8 h at 30 °C and 800 rpm. (E) Scheme of a continuous flow reaction with PBR loaded with 1 g of HB-5.2, operated with the given working conditions (left side) and the titer of 3-HBA (purple) and acetate (gray), as a function of the time on the stream (right side).

Next, we tested HB-5.2 with primary diols, such as ethylene glycol, which can potentially be obtained from the depolymerization of plastic waste (i.e, postconsumer poly­(ethylene terephthalate) (PET)). , Starting from a mix of 180 mM ethylene glycol and 20 mM ethanol, we analyzed the reaction crude by UPLC-MS. We achieved 101 ± 66 μM of a dihydroxybutanoic acid and 5.26 ± 0.74 μM of 2,3,4-trihydroxybutanoic acid. Besides these polyhydroxy acids, we also found 557 ± 69 μM 3-HBA, 11.9 ± 0.4 mM acetate, and 5.1 ± 0.8 mM 2-hydroxy acetic (glycolic) acid (Figures B and S16–S17) as byproducts. Using UPLC-MS, we were unable to distinguish between the linear 3,4-dihydroxybutanoic acid and the α-branched 2,3-dihydroxybutanoic acid, as both showed identical retention times and masses. However, GC-MS analysis revealed a chromatographic peak with the same retention time and mass fragmentation pattern as the 3,4-dihydroxybutyric acid standard. No signal matching the 2,3-dihydroxybutyric acid standard was detected (Figure S18), suggesting that the linear isomer was the predominant product. These results indicate that HB-5.2 can condense, asymmetrically reduce, and hydrolyze either two glycolyl-CoAs to yield an α,β,ω-trihydroxylated acid or one glycolyl-CoA and one acetyl-CoA to produce the linear β,ω-dihydroxylated acid. Based on GC-MS data, the branched condensation of acetyl-CoA and glycolyl-CoA appears to be disfavored when catalyzed by HB-5.2.

To further explore substrate flexibility, HB-5.2 was also tested with a mixture of 1-propanol and ethanol under the same conditions used for ethylene glycol. In this reaction, we mainly found noncondensed oxidized products, achieving 1.2 ± 0.4 mM acetic acid and 91.3 ± 2.9 mM propanoic acid (Figure S16). In addition, we identified two hydroxy acids by UPLC-MS (Figures C and S19). On one hand, we found 3-hydroxypentanoic acid (1.42 ± 0.48 mM) as the major condensed product resulting from the linear condensation of propionyl-CoA and acetyl-CoA in that order. On the other hand, a much lower amount of 2-methyl-3-hydroxypentanoic acid (5.46 ± 3.4 μM) was found. This latter product was synthesized through the branched condensation of two propionyl-CoA molecules. Surprisingly, neither 3-HBA nor 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyric acid were detected, which suggests that ReTHL preferentially binds propionyl-CoA as a priming unit. Once the enzyme is primed, it can condense either an acetyl-CoA or a second propionyl-CoA. The product distribution observed with the ethanol/propanol mixture is consistent with the behavior of HB-5.2 in reactions using ethanol/ethylene glycol mix, where branched products were also limited. This is likely due to the low ethanol concentration in the reaction mix, which restricts acetyl-CoA availability. Acetyl-CoA is essential for initiating branched condensation. Therefore, the low ethanol levels relative to 1-propanol or ethylene glycol may explain the absence of branched products. Furthermore, branched product formation may also be limited by ReTHL’s inherent preference for linear acyl-CoA condensation, consistent with previous in vivo observations ,

To the best of our knowledge, none of these 3-hydroxy acids have ever been synthesized from primary alcohols. This new biosynthetic pathway, enabled by HB-5.2, provides an alternative to engineered fermentative processes. It also complements in vitro cascades producing 3-HBA from d-xylose, glucose, , or homoserine. These results remark the industrial potential of this heterogeneous biocatalyst for valorizing primary alcohols and ethyl esters, common substances that are produced in the industry as wastes. ,,,

Operational Stability of HB-5.2 and Its Implementation for the Continuous Synthesis of 3-HBA

Once the efficiency and the versatility of HB-5.2 are proven to produce β-hydroxy acids, we evaluated its operational stability in both batch and packed-bed (PBR) reactors. In batch discontinuous mode, we first performed a complete reaction course to simultaneously monitor the production of 3-HBA and acetate. Figure S20A shows that 3-HBA production is 2 times faster than acetate accumulation according to the reaction kinetic constants (0.32 and 0.158 h–1 for 3-HBA and acetate, respectively). After 24 h of batch reaction, HB-5.2 produced 16 ± 0.165 mM 3-HBA and 26 ± 0.218 mM acetate. After the first 8 h of reaction, the 3-HBA titer reached a plateau, selecting this reaction time to assess the HB-5.2 operational stability in batch. The heterogeneous biocatalyst was reused for 7 consecutive cycles of 8 h, and both 3-HBA and acetate titers were determined by HPLC. Figure D shows that HB-5.2 was stable for 3 consecutive cycles with negligible variations in 3-HBA titer. Afterward, the titer decayed to 7.5 mM after the seventh cycle.

In parallel to the batch reaction cycles, we studied the continuous operation of HB-5.2 for the synthesis of 3-HBA. To do so, we packed 0.5 g of HB-5.2 in a plug-flow column to set up a PBR. This PBR was operated at three different flow rates: 100, 30, and 10 μL min–1, in a decreasing flow rate ramp, feeding 300 mM acetone, 200 mM ethanol, 0.5 mM CoA, 1 mM NAD+ and 1 mM TCEP at pH 8 and 30 °C. As expected, the higher flow rate led to a decrease in the 3-HBA titer but increased the space-time yield (STY) of the process (Figure S20B). At 10 μL min–1, we detected 13.85 ± 0.22 mM of 3-HBA synthesized at 1.21 g·L–1·h–1. In contrast, when the flow rate increased 10 times, the 3-HBA titer decreased to 2.0 ± 0.095 mM, and the STY just increased up to 1.77 g L–1 h–1. When analyzing the acetate:3-HBA molar ratio, we observed a decrease in that ratio at higher flow rates, supporting the higher efficiency of ReTHL to condense acetyl-CoA than that of EcTesB to hydrolyze it. Hence, this insight was confirmed both in batch and flow reactors. From flow rate analysis, we selected 10 μL min–1 as the condition with the better balance between titer and STY to evaluate the operational stability of the HB-5.2 under continuous operation. To this aim, we fabricated a PBR packed with 1 g of HB-5.2 and fed it with the reaction mix described above. Figure E shows a stable titer at 20 mM 3-HB during the first 36 h of reaction. The 3-HBA in the outcome solution was isolated by liquid–liquid organic phase extraction, resulting in 56% 3-HBA isolated yield. 1H-NMR of this isolated product confirmed the presence of both 3-HBA and acetic acid (Figure S21). Then the titer steadily decreased, reaching 50% of the initial titer (10 mM) after 573 h. Outstandingly, the PBR containing 5 enzymes and utilizing substoichiometric amounts of two cofactors (NAD+ and CoA) operated for almost 24 days. The high operational half-time of this 5-enzyme immobilized system supports the potential of protein immobilization technologies for the development of highly stable biocatalysts to accelerate complex biosynthetic cascades. Notably, the acetone valve not only maintained redox balance to drive the oxidative cascade but also enabled high 3-HBA titers in the oxygen-limited PBR, due to its oxygen-independent mechanism. The STY surpasses previously reported five-enzyme oxidative cascades in PBRs that rely on enzyme-driven H2O2 disproportionation for oxygen supply. Unlike those systems, which show operational lifetimes under 24 h, the absence of H2O2 in our setup contributes to its long-term stability, maintaining over 50% activity after 3 weeks. All in all, HB-5.2 enables efficient oxidative cascades under limited oxygen concentration, increasing the systeḿs safety as high pressure to increase oxygen supply is not needed, avoiding combustion risks. ,

To further understand the PBR exhaustion, we interrogated HB-5.2 after its use in both batch and PBR setups. To that aim, we performed ex situ leaching and kinetic studies of HB-5.2 after 7 batch cycles and 24 days of continuous operation. For the PBR, we analyzed three main sections: inlet, medium, and outlet, as previously described. Both protein loads and enzyme activity upon operation were determined through SDS-PAGE analysis and enzyme activity assays, respectively (Figure S22). On one hand, the SDS-PAGE showed some leaching in the used HB-5.2, both under batch and flow conditions. Interestingly, the enzyme leaching was more noticeable in the inlet section than in the middle or outlet sections, though they were minimal. Specifically, the major loss of protein occurred for ΔNPduP in the inlet section of the PBR reactor. We suggest that inlet sections are subjected to higher operational stress (i.e., pressure drop), facilitating the leaching of enzymes (or subunits) that are not fully irreversibly bound. On the other hand, we observe no activity loss for immobilized BsADH, TtHBDH, and EcTesB upon their use both in batch and flow setups. In contrast, immobilized ReTHL maintained 75–60% of its initial activity after both continuous and discontinuous operation. However, the most dramatic activity reduction was observed in the immobilized ΔNPduP, which only retained 30% of its activity before being used discontinuously in 7 batch cycles or continuously for 24 days in the PBR, in agreement with the ΔNPduP leaching (Figure S22). Thus, the operational inactivation of HB-5.2 is mainly due to ΔNPduP inactivation. Based on these ex situ experiments and the computational model, which predicts that even minor losses of ΔNPduP activity strongly reduce 3-HBA titers, we suggest that the bioreactor is primarily inactivated due to ΔNPduP. This enzyme is leached and also likely loses function, probably because operational conditions induce structural distortions. Postimmobilization polymer coatings may increase the stability of the immobilized enzymes as seen in other works.

Conclusions

In this work, we have developed an in vitro enzymatic cascade with exceptionally high theoretical mass yield (113%)surpassing other previously described routes starting from glucose (58%) or vinyl acetate (60%) (Table ). However, this synthetic pathway faces a significant thermodynamic challenge as the oxidative condensation of ethanol is 14 and 9 times less exergonic than in vitro pathways starting from vinyl acetate and glucose, respectively (Table ). Using a cell-free and confined (immobilized) pathway, we surpassed the thermodynamic limitations and produced (S)-3-HBA from ethanol. As a result, we achieved titers comparable to those obtained from glucose, using both in vitro and in vivo systems, and from vinyl esters in vitro. Although the titer is 1 order of magnitude lower than that achieved for (R)-3-HBA via fed-batch fermentation from glucose, these results highlight the strong potential of our approach. In contrast, when starting from ethanol, our in vitro immobilized pathway produces a titer 18 times higher than that obtained with Saccharomyces cerevisiae engineered to synthesize 3-HBA via a reverse fermentative pathway, despite being 21 times less favorable thermodynamically than the corresponding pathway in this microorganism (Table ).

1 Metrics Comparison of Different 3-HBA Producing Systems, Including This Work

ref.	system	substrate	isomer	ΔG° (kcal mol–1)	theoretical mass yield (%)	Titer (g L–1) (mM)	yield (%)	TTNCoA	TTNNAD(H)	
	In vivo (E. coli)	glucose	R	–54	58	16.3 (157)	17.6	N.D.	N.D.	
	In vivo (E. coli)	glucose	S	–54	58	2.08 (20)	53.6	N.D.	N.D.	
	In vivo (S. cerevisiae)	ethanol	S	–133	113	0.1 (1)	2.2	N.D.	N.D.	
	cell-free	glucose	 	–54	58	1.35 (7)	 	5	2.5	
	cell-free	vinyl acetate	S	–88	60	2.5 (24)	24	9.6	9.6	
this work	immobilized	ethanol	S	–6	112	1.87 (18)	18.8	72	72	
a The theoretical mass yield is calculated considering the reaction stoichiometry without auxiliary cosubstrates to keep the redox balance and assuming a 100% transformation efficiency of the substrate into 3-HBA without formation of byproducts.

b The yield is defined as the percentage of 3-HB produced regarding the initial concentration of feedstock (ethanol, glucose, or vinyl acetate), accounting for the reaction stoichiometry. One molecule of 3-HBA per 1 molecule of glucose, and per 2 molecules of either vinyl acetate or ethanol.

Despite the unfavorable thermodynamics, the high titers and yields we report in this work were possible through a holistic biocatalyst engineering strategy. Without such an engineering effort, this cell-free biosynthetic pathway fails to efficiently transform ethanol into 3-HBA. Thus, enzyme coimmobilization significantly enhanced operational stability and allowed the process intensification in continuous reactors, achieving an unprecedented lifetime for systems of such complexity. Furthermore, this system is flexible enough to efficiently use different ethanol sources, including renewable ethanol and ethyl and vinyl esters. Similarly, this heterogeneous biocatalytic system condenses bulkier alcohols than ethanol, bearing C2 substitutions (i.e., −OH or −CH3), which enables access to dihydroxy, trihydroxy, and α-branched β-hydroxy acids via an unprecedented route. As far as we know, there is only one precedent of a 5-enzyme system coimmobilized on porous carriers and implemented in flow. However, such a system is only a modification route to regioselectively oxidize diols into γ-hydroxy acids, unlike the anabolic route herein described. Assembling cell-free anabolic pathways utilizing multifunctional heterogeneous biocatalysts is rarely exploited despite the advantages of spatially confining them. The multifunctional heterogeneous biocatalyst herein developed yields some of the highest total TTNs ever reported for in situ and simultaneous regeneration of two cofactors (NAD­(H) and CoA) (Table ). Our results offer promising advances for CoA-dependent pathway engineering, yet TTN values are still far from the industrial requirements for expensive cofactors (TTN > 1000).

Additionally, the immobilized enzyme system demonstrated great versatility in the oxidative acylation of primary alcohols, yielding a variety of acyl-CoA derivatives. These molecules have wide-ranging applications in chemical biology, serving as substrates to probe unknown enzymatic activities or as precursors for the design of novel in vitro biosynthetic pathways. − Taken together, this study lays the groundwork for the intensification of in vitro cascade reactions using immobilized enzyme systems to transform simple, low-cost, and sustainable feedstocks into high-value products. We envision expanding this concept to more complex biosynthetic routes toward the synthesis of natural products.

Methods

Materials

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides (NAD+, NADH, NADP+, and NADPH) were purchased from Gerbu Biotechnik GmbH (Heidelberg, Germany). Agarose 6% cross-linked beads (6BCL) were purchased from Agarose Beads Technologies (Madrid, Spain). Primary alcohols (1a-r), coenzyme A derivatives (coenzyme A, acetyl-CoA, propionyl-CoA and 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA), dl-dithiothreitol (DTT), tris­(2-carboxyethyl)­phosphine (TCEP), Ellman’s reagent (DTNB), alcohol dehydrogenase from S. cerevisiae (ScADH), (R)-3-hydroxybutyric acid, 3-hydroxy-2-methylbutyric acid, (S)-3,4-dihydroxybutyric acid, (2R,3R)-2,3,4-trihydroxybutyric acid, glycidol, sodium borohydride, iminodiacetic acid, sodium periodate, kanamycin sulfate, IPTG, polyallylamine (Mw 65,000; PAH), polyethylenimine (Mw 60,000; PEI), cobalt­(II) chloride and ethyl acetoacetate were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co (St. Louis, IL, USA). Aldehydes (2a-m) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co (St. Louis, IL, USA) at a > 95% purity and stored as indicated by the manufacturer. 3-hydroxypentanoic acid and 3-hydroxy-2-methylpentanoic acid were purchased from Biosynth (Berkshire, U.K.). 2,3-dihydroxybutyric acid was purchased from Ambinter (Orleans, France). Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC), rhodamine B isothiocyanate (RhB), atto 390 NHS ester, alexa fluor 647 NHS ester, Phusion High Fidelity DNA polymerase, and FastDigest enzymes were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA). LB media, tryptone, and yeast extract were purchased from NZYtech (Lisboa, Portugal). Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford Assay Kit from Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA, USA). SePduP (aldehyde CoA-acylating dehydrogenase from S. enterica), AsTHL5 (thiolase 5 from A. suum), ReTHL (thiolase from R. eutropha), EcTesB (thioesterase B from E. coli), BsADH (alcohol dehydrogenase from B. stearothermophilus), and LpNOX (NADH oxidase from L. pentosus) encoding sequences were optimized for E. coli codon usage, synthesized, and cloned into the expression vector pET28b by Genscript (Leiden, Netherlands). pET28b containing the coding sequences for TtHBDH (3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase from T. thermophilus HB27) was kindly donated by Prof. J. Berenguer from Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (Spain). pET28b containing the coding sequences for BsGDH (glucose dehydrogenase from B. subtilis) was kindly donated by CASCAT GmbH (Straubing, Germany). All protein sequences are provided in Table S2. E. coli DH5α and BL21­(DE3) strains from our collection were used to prepare chemically competent bacteria for DNA propagation and protein expression, respectively. Buffers and other reagents were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Co. (St. Louis, IL, USA). Advanced ethanol (EN 15376) was kindly provided by PERSEO Biotechnology (Valencia, Spain). Solvents were purchased from Scharlab (Barcelona, Spain).

Deletion of N-Terminal from pduP Gene

Deletion of the first 28 amino acids of the SePduP was done through a PCR strategy using ΔNPduP_fw and ΔNPduP_rv primers (Table S1). The thermal cycle was configured like this: 30 s at 98 °C, the amplification of the ΔNPduP gene was done for 35 cycles (15 s at 98 °C; 30 s at 67.4 °C and 1 min at 72 °C), then 10 min at 72 °C. The amplicon was isolated using gel electrophoresis and recloned into an empty pET28b­(+) plasmid between the NdeI and BamHI restriction sites and sequenced by Sanger sequencing using the T7 primers.

Protein Expression and Purification

Briefly, all the enzymes were transformed by thermal shock in E. coli BL21 cells with the corresponding plasmid, and they were grown overnight in lysogenic broth (LB) agar plates supplemented with 50 μg mL–1 of kanamycin. Single colonies from agar plates were picked and cultured in LB-kanamycin and 0.2% glucose at 37 °C and 200 rpm shaking overnight. These growth cultures were used for inoculating (1%) fresh media. All enzymes were expressed and purified following standard methods (See Supporting Methods).

Enzymatic Activity Assays

All enzymatic assays were carried out in a final volume of 200 μL on a 96-well plate in a Biotek Epoch2Microplate Spectrophotometer thermostatized at 30 °C. The assays were triggered by adding 5 μL of either a solution (free enzymes) or a suspension (immobilized enzymes) with a known protein concentration to calculate the specific (U/mg) and volumetric (U mL–1) activities. One enzyme unit (U) is specifically defined for each enzyme. Each enzyme was measured with an specific activity assay as described in the Supporting methods. Specifically, ΔNPduP was biochemically characterized (substrate scope, kinetic parameters and pH profile) as described in Supporting Methods.

Enzyme Immobilization

Carrier functionalization was performed as previously described in a ratio of 1/10 (w/v) unless otherwise indicated. Incubations were under mechanical stirring at 200 rpm at room temperature. Carrier recovery and washes were by vacuum filtering. After its preparation, every carrier was stored at 4 °C

Enzyme Immobilization on Glyoxyl Agarose (AG-G)

100 mg of AG-G was resuspended in 1 mL of a solution containing 1 U of the corresponding enzyme in 0.1 M sodium bicarbonate buffer at pH 10 and incubated for 1 to 3 h at 4 or 25 °C. Then, 1 mg of NaBH4 was added and incubated for 30 min. Finally, the heterogeneous biocatalyst was washed with an excess of 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer at pH 7.

Enzyme Immobilization on Cobalt Chelates Agarose (AG-Co2+)

100 mg of AG-Co2+ was resuspended in 1 mL of a solution containing 1 U of the corresponding enzyme in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer at pH 7.4 and incubated for 1 h at 25 °C. When using crude extracts, the ratio between AG-Co2+ and crude extracts never exceeded 1:20 (w/v).

Enzyme Immobilization on Polyethylenimine/Polyallylamine Agarose (AG-PEI/PAH)

100 mg of AG-PEI or AG-PAH was resuspended in 1 mL of a solution containing 1 U of the corresponding enzyme in 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer at pH 7, and incubated for 1 h at 25 °C.

Enzyme Immobilization on Trifunctional Agarose (AG-Co2+/G/A)

100 mg of AG-Co2+/G/A was resuspended in 1 mL of a solution containing 1 U of the corresponding enzyme in 200 mM NaCl, 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer at pH 8, and incubated for 1.5 h at 25 °C. Then, 1 mg of NaBH4 was added and incubated for 30 min. Finally, the biocatalyst was washed with an excess of 0.1 M phosphate buffer at pH 7.

Co-Immobilization of the 5-Enzyme System on Glyoxyl Agarose (AG-G)

400 mg of AG-G was resuspended in 4 mL of precooled 0.1 M sodium bicarbonate buffer at pH 10, containing the corresponding amount of each enzyme (Table S5). The suspension is incubated for 1 h at 4 °C under gentle stirring before its reduction with 0.5 mg mL–1 of NaBH4 for 30 min. Finally, the biocatalyst was washed with an excess of 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer at pH 7.

Co-Immobilization of the 5-Enzyme System on Cobalt Chelates Agarose (AG-Co2+)

500 mg of AG-Co2+ was resuspended in 20 mL of a mix of crude extracts containing the corresponding enzymes in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer at pH 7.4 and incubated for 1 h at 4 °C.

Chromatographic Methodologies

Ultraperformance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS): NAD­(H), Coenzyme A, and its thioester derivatives were analyzed and quantified using an Acquity UPLC equipped with a photodiode array detector (PDA) and coupled to an electrospray ionization and a time-of-flight mass spectrometer (ESI-TOF) LCT Premier XE from Waters as described before. , The chromatography was performed using an Acquity Premier BEH C18 2.1 × 100 mm2, 1.7 μm column (Waters, MA, USA). The column was thermostated at 30 °C. The gradient elution buffers were (A) 100 mM ammonium formate in water and (B) acetonitrile. The following gradient program was used at a 0.3 mL min–1: from 0 to 1 min, isocratic at 99% A; from 1 to 14 min, gradient to 80% A; from 14 to 15 min, gradient to 10% A; from 15 to 17 min, isocratic at 10% A; from 17 to 17.5 min, gradient back to 99% A; from 17.5 to 20 min, stabilization at 99% A. 5 μL of samples were injected and the quantification done by UV absorbance at 254 nm and its molecular masses were confirmed by ESI-TOF MS. Mass spectrometry detection was performed working in positive mode. The MS range was between m/z 100 and 1000. The capillary and cone voltages were set at 1500 and 15 V, respectively. The desolvation gas temperature was 350 °C, and the source temperature was 120 °C. The desolvation gas flow was set at 600 L h–1, and the cone gas flow was set at 50 L h–1. Quantification and data analysis were done in Masslynx version 4.1

Calibration curves of redox cofactors and CoA-derivatives using pure standards were used to quantify their concentration in the reaction. According to these concentrations, we determined the analytical yields of the reactions as described in the following equation analyticalyield (A.yield)(%)=([P]t/[S]o)×100

Where [S]o is the sum of cofactor species ((CoA + Acyl-CoA) or (NADH + NAD+)) and [P] t is the concentration of each cofactor species (CoA, Acyl-CoA, NADH or NAD+) at a given reaction time (t).

α and/or γ functionalized β-hydroxyacids were analyzed and quantified using an Acquity UPLC coupled to a Synapt XS high-resolution time-of-flight (Q-ToF) mass spectrometer S from Waters. For the analysis of 3-hydroxybutyric acid, 3-hydroxypentanoic acid, 3-hydroxy-2-methylbutyric acid, 3-hydroxy-2-methylpentanoic acid, 3,4-dihydroxybutyric acid, and 2,3-dihydroxybutyric acid, an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 2.1 × 50 mm2, 1.7 μm column was used (Waters, MA, USA). The C18 column was thermostated at 40 °C. The gradient elution buffers were (A) 0.1% TFA in water and (B) acetonitrile. The following gradient program was used at a 0.4 mL min–1: from 0 to 0.5 min, isocratic at 99% A; from 0.5 to 7 min, gradient to 1% A; from 7 to 8 min, isocratic at 1% A; from 8 to 8.5 min, gradient to 99% A; from 8.5 to 10 min, stabilization at 99% A. The analysis of 2,3,4-trihydroxypentanoic acid was performed with an Acquity Premier BEH Amide 2.1 × 50 mm2, 1.7 μm column (Waters, MA, USA). The amide column was thermostated at 40 °C. The gradient elution buffers were (A) 100 mM ammonium formate in water and (B) acetonitrile. The following gradient program was used at a 0.3 mL min–1: from 0 to 0.5 min, isocratic at 10% A; from 0.5 to 2.5 min, gradient to 60% A; from 2.5 to 3 min, isocratic at 60% A; from 3 to 3.7 min, gradient to 10% A; from 3.7 to 5 min, stabilization at 10% A. In all cases, 1 μL of samples and standards was injected, and the quantification was done by extracting the corresponding m/z ion chromatogram. Mass spectrometry detection was performed working in negative mode. The MS range was between m/z 50 and 800. The capillary and cone voltages were set at 1200 and 30 V, respectively. The desolvation gas temperature was 50 °C, and the source temperature was 130 °C. The desolvation gas flow was set at 800 L h–1, and the cone gas flow was set at 50 L h–1. To guarantee accurate mass, the instrument was tuned for m/z 554.2615 (Leu-Enk) to apply the mass correction every 0.5 s of the acquisition. Quantification and data analysis were done in QuanLynx V4.2.

High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC)

Carboxylic acids and β-hydroxyacids were quantified by High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) on an Agilent Infinity II 1260 with a PDA detector from Agilent (Santa Clara, CA, USA) using a Rezex ROA-Organic Acid H+ (8%) 300 × 7.8 mm2 column from Phenomenex (Torrance, CA, USA). Elution of compounds was performed at an isocratic flow of 0.5 mL min–1 with a mobile phase of 2.5 mM sulfuric acid in nanopure water

Gas Chromatography Coupled to Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS)

Alcohols, aldehydes, acetone, carboxylic acids and β-hydroxyacids (3-hydroxy butyric acid, 3,4-dihydroxybutyric acid and 2,3-dihydroxybutyric acid) were quantified in an Agilent 7820a System gas chromatographer equipped with an Agilent 5975C Mass Selective Detector (GC-MS) operated with electron ionization source and using a J&W DB-WAX column (30 m × 0.25 mm × 25 μm), helium as carrier gas. The temperature of the injector was 250 °C, and the temperatures for the detector were 230 and 150 °C for the MS source and MS quadrupole, respectively. The separation of the compounds was carried out by following the temperature ramp: initial temperature, 40 °C, was held for 4 min, then the temperature was increased up to 200 °C at a rate of 20 °C min–1 and maintained for 3 min. Postrun time was 3 min at 220 °C. For the analysis, 1 μL of the samples was injected into the inlet working at a split ratio of 20:1 and a constant flow of 0.7 mL min–1, the MS range was between m/z 20 to 200. The MSD was turned off during the elution of the solvent (water) (from 5.2 to 6.7 min).

Biotransformations Performed by Soluble and Immobilized Systems

Propionaldehyde to Propionyl-CoA Catalyzed by Soluble Enzymes

The reactions were carried out in 500 μL of 10 mM propionaldehyde, 1 mM CoA, 0.1–2.5 mM NAD+, 1 mM TCEP or DTT in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer at pH 8, 30 °C, and 250 rpm for 16 h. Reactions were triggered by addition of ΔNPduP to a final activity of 0.01 U mL–1. Reaction containing NOX-based regeneration system additionally contained 0.15 mM FAD+ and 0.01 U mL–1 LpNOX. The reactions were stopped by filtration through a 10 kDa membrane and analyzed as indicated previously

Alcohols to Acyl-CoA Catalyzed by a Heterogeneous Biocatalyst

2 mg of HB-1.X were placed in a 2 mL tube and the reactions triggered by the addition of 300 μL of a mix containing 10 mM alcohol 1a–b, 1 mM CoA, 0.1 mM NAD+, 1 mM TCEP and 50 mM acetone in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer at pH 8. The reactions were incubated at 30 °C and 800 rpm for 16 h. The reactions were stopped by filtration and analyzed as indicated previously.

Ethanol to 3-Hydroxybutyric Acid Catalyzed by Free Enzymes

The reactions were carried out in 500 μL of 200 mM ethanol, 300 mM acetone, 0.5 mM CoA, 1 mM NAD+, 1 mM TCEP, and the indicated amount of enzymes in 0.15 M sodium phosphate buffer at pH 8, 30 °C, and 250 rpm for 16 h. When BsGDH was present, the reaction mix also contained 100 mM glucose instead acetone. The reactions were stopped by filtration through a 10 kDa membrane and analyzed as indicated previously. Upon optimization of the cell-free system, the amount of enzymes added to the reaction media was modified to 1 U mL–1 of BsADH, 20 U mL–1 of ΔNPduP, 0.25 U mL–1 of ReTHL, 2.5 U mL–1 of TtHBDH, and 0.1 U mL–1 of EcTesB. Likewise, the initial concentration of Coenzyme A decreased to 0.5 mM, and the initial concentration of ethanol and acetone increased to 200 mM and 300 mM, respectively.

Ethanol to 3-Hydroxybutyric Acid Catalyzed by Immobilized Enzymes

An indicated amount of heterogeneous biocatalyst was placed in a 2 mL tube, and the reaction was triggered by the addition of the reaction mix to a final ratio of 1/5 (w/v). The reaction mixture contained 50–200 mM ethanol, 100–300 mM acetone, 0.5–1 mM CoA, 1 mM NAD+, 1 mM TCEP, in 0.15 M sodium phosphate buffer at pH 8, 30 °C, and 800 rpm for 16 h. The reactions were stopped by filtration and analyzed by chromatographic methods as previously described. Operational stability of HB-5.2 was assayed by performing consecutive batch cycles of 8 h at 30 °C at 800 rpm, increasing the reaction volume. 200 mg of HB-5.2 were resuspended in 1 mL 200 mM ethanol, 0.5 mM CoA, 1 mM NAD+, 1 mM TCEP, 300 mM acetone in 0.15 M sodium phosphate buffer at pH 8. Each reaction cycle was stopped by filtration, and the supernatant analyzed as indicated previously. Between cycles, the HB-5.2 was washed with 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer at pH 8 and stored at 4 °C.

Substrate Scope of the Immobilized Multienzyme System

Acetaldehyde, vinyl acetate, pure ethyl acetate or recycled ethyl acetate, ethylene glycol, and 1-propanol and industrial ethanol were tested as starting materials. Unless otherwise indicated, 40 mg of HB-5.2 were placed in a 2 mL tube, and the reaction was triggered by the addition of the reaction mix to a final ratio of 1/5 (w/v). The reaction mixtures contained 50 mM of the corresponding substrate, 0.5 mM CoA, 1 mM NAD+, 1 mM TCEP, 300 mM acetone in 0.15 M sodium phosphate buffer at pH 8, 30 °C, and 800 rpm for 16 h. The reactions starting from ethyl acetate additionally contained 5 mg of Novozyme 435. Alternatively, bioethanol was also tested as a starting material under the same conditions but using 200 mM as the initial substrate concentration. Additionally, ethylene glycol and 1-propanol were tested as starting materials in a mix with ethanol (molar ratio 10:1) to a total concentration of 200 mM of alcohols. The concentration of the other components of the reaction media was the same as described previously. All the reactions were stopped by filtration and analyzed as indicated previously

Continuous Conversion of Ethanol to 3-Hydroxybutyric Acid in Flow

To determine the STY at different flow rates (100, 30, 10 μL min–1), 0.5 g of HB-5.2 was packed in a column and the reaction triggered by pumping reaction mix consisting of 200 mM ethanol, 300 mM of acetone, 0.5 mM CoA, 1 mM NAD+, 1 mM TCEP in 0.15 M sodium phosphate buffer at pH 8 and 30 °C. Samples were withdrawn from the elution and analyzed as indicated previously. To determine the operational stability of HB-5.2 in flow, 1 g of HB-5.2 was packed in a column, and the reaction was triggered as described previously. Samples were withdrawn from the outlet of the reactor after different times on stream, and analyzed as indicated previously. 3-HBA in the outlet samples was isolated by liquid–liquid extraction and characterized by 1H NMR (see Supporting Method for more details).

Computational Modeling

Construction of the computational model and the related analysis were conducted using CopasiUI version 4.40. A fixed compartment was created, and 8 reaction equations were entered as displayed in Tables S6–S7. A semiquantitative kinetic model was constructed, as initial settings, k eq values listed in Table S6 were calculated using eQuilibrator 3.0, with pH set as 8, pMg = 2, and ionic strength = 0.2 M. K m values were either experimentally determined or obtained from the BRENDA database (Table S6). Considering that EcTesB hydrolyzes Acetyl-CoA nonspecifically during the reaction, a specific function was developed based on the Henri-Michaelis–Menten equation.

For the first round of model fitting, Model 1.0 was constructed with initial concentrations of ethanol, acetone, CoA, and NAD+ set as 200, 300, 1, and 1 mM, respectively. In the model, V max values for each enzyme were set to the same numerical value, being 1 or 10 U mL–1. During model fitting, V max values of BsADH for ethanol (1a) and acetone in our model constantly followed a fixed ratio of 1:0.7 based on the specific activity values of BsADH for each compound and V max values of EcTesB for 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA (5a) and acetyl-CoA (3a) in our model constantly followed a fixed ratio of 1:0.15 based on the specific activity values of EcTesB for each compound. The result of the first round of model fitting was Model 1.1 (Table S8). For the second round of model fitting, the same procedure as the first round of model fitting but using the enzyme concentrations resulted from the first round, the result of the second round of model fitting was Model 1.2 (Table S8).

Fluorescence Microscopy

Enzymes were labeled following standard protocols. Technical details about enzyme labeling are described in Supporting Methods.

Epifluorescence Microscopy Imaging

To monitor intraparticle NADH distribution during the conversion of ethanol to 3-hydroxybutyric acid in heterogeneous media, reaction samples (containing either HB-1.3-labeled + HB-4, or HB-5.1) were withdrawn and placed onto 8-well μ-slides (Ibidi, Gräfelfing, Germany). NADH autofluorescence was visualized using epifluorescence microscopy on a ZEISS Axio Observer microscope (Carl Zeiss, Germany) equipped with a Colibri 5 LED excitation system. Excitation was set at λex = 385/30 nm, and emission was collected at λem = 445/50 nm using a 49 DAPI filter (excitation at 395 nm). For tracking of labeled HB-1.3, images were acquired in the red channel using excitation at λex = 550/25 nm and emission at λem= 605/70 nm with a 43 HE DsRed filter set (beamsplitter at 570 nm). At least two representative images were acquired at each time point using a 10× objective, and data from 8–10 beads per condition were analyzed to determine the mean relative fluorescence units (RFU) and standard deviation. Image acquisition and processing were performed using ZEISS ZEN software and FIJI (ImageJ).

Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy Imaging

The localization and distribution of fluorophore-labeled immobilized enzymes for the different distributions were recorded with a Spectral ZEISS LSM 880 confocal microscope. Imaging was performed using 20× (0.8 NA) and 40× (1.2 NA) objectives and different excitation lasers, λex: 405 nm for Atto 390, λex: 488 nm for FITC, λex: 561 nm for Rhodamine B, and λex: 633 nm for Alexa Fluor 647. All samples of each biocatalyst with the fluorescently labeled immobilized enzyme were suspended in an 8-well chamber slide (Ibidi) in a 1:200 (w:v) buffered suspension in 25 mM phosphate buffer at pH 7. The resulting micrographs were analyzed with FIJI software to determine the relative infiltration radius and the colocalization parameters. ,,

Supplementary Material

ERC-Co (METACELL-818089) project and Agencia Estatal de Investigación (PID2024-162406OB-I00) are acknowledged for funding. F.L.-G. thanks IKERBASQUE for sponsoring him. D.A.-S. thanks the Basque government for his PhD fellowship (PRE_2021_1_0334). A.H.O. thanks BIKAINTEK program (Basque Government; 010-B1/2020) for cofunding him. M.I. thanks to Agencia Estatal de Investigación for the FPI fellowship (PRE2022-101787). We thank PERSEO Biotechnology for kindly providing advanced bioethanol samples. We are grateful to Javier Calvo for his support in utilizing the chromatography/mass spectrometry facilities.

All data generated in this study are available in the Supporting Information and from the corresponding author upon request. Source data are provided with this paper.

The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acscatal.5c06753.Primary sequences of enzymes, primers used in this study, technical details of all heterogeneous biocatalysts herein described, HPLC, UPLC-MS, and GC-MS information, 1H NMR of the isolated products, and additional supporting experimental data (PDF)

F.L.-G. and A.H.O. conceived the project. A.H.O., I.L.L., D.A.-.S performed most of the experiments. M.I performed confocal fluorescence microscopy studies. U.F.–P. performed chromatographic analysis. F.L-G. and A.H.O. evaluated the data and wrote the original draft. All authors contributed to the revision of the paper.

The authors declare the following competing financial interest(s): All authors declare no competing interests. CIC biomaGUNE has filed a European patent (P6955EP00) on the fabrication of biocatalysts to transform primary alcohols into beta-hydroxy acids.


Patel R. N. Biocatalysis for synthesis of pharmaceuticals Bioorg. Med. Chem. 2018 26 7 1252 1274 10.1016/j.bmc.2017.05.023 28648492
de María P. de Gonzalo G. Alcántara A. Biocatalysis as Useful Tool in Asymmetric Synthesis: An Assessment of Recently Granted Patents (2014–2019) Catalysts 2019 9 10 802 10.3390/catal9100802
Tseng H.-C. Martin C. H. Nielsen D. R. Prather K. L. J. Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for enhanced production of (R)-and (S)-3-hydroxybutyrate Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2009 75 10 3137 3145 10.1128/AEM.02667-08 19304817 PMC2681625
Chen G.-Q. Wu Q. Microbial production and applications of chiral hydroxyalkanoates Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2005 67 5 592 599 10.1007/s00253-005-1917-2 15700123
Perez-Zabaleta M. Guevara-Martínez M. Gustavsson M. Quillaguamán J. Larsson G. van Maris A. J. A. Comparison of engineered Escherichia coli AF1000 and BL21 strains for (R)-3-hydroxybutyrate production in fed-batch cultivation Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2019 103 14 5627 5639 10.1007/s00253-019-09876-y 31104101 PMC6597613
Blaisse M. R. Dong H. Fu B. Chang M. C. Y. Discovery and Engineering of Pathways for Production of α-Branched Organic Acids J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017 139 41 14526 14532 10.1021/jacs.7b07400 28990776
Schrittwieser J. H. Velikogne S. Kroutil W. Artificial Biocatalytic Linear Cascades to Access Hydroxy Acids, Lactones, and α- and β-Amino Acids Catalysts 2018 8 5 205 10.3390/catal8050205
Park H. He H. Yan X. Liu X. Scrutton N. S. Chen G.-Q. PHA is not just a Bioplastic! Biotechnol. Adv. 2024 71 108320 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2024.108320 38272380
Tieu K. Perier C. Caspersen C. Teismann P. Wu D.-C. Yan S.-D. Naini A. Vila M. Jackson-Lewis V. Ramasamy R. Przedborski S. D-β-Hydroxybutyrate rescues mitochondrial respiration and mitigates features of Parkinson disease J. Clin. Invest. 2003 112 6 892 901 10.1172/JCI200318797 12975474 PMC193668
Zhao Y. Zou B. Shi Z. Wu Q. Chen G.-Q. The effect of 3-hydroxybutyrate on the in vitro differentiation of murine osteoblast MC3T3-E1 and in vivo bone formation in ovariectomized rats Biomaterials 2007 28 20 3063 3073 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2007.03.003 17418401
Yao P. Wang L. Yuan J. Cheng L. Jia R. Xie M. Feng J. Wang M. Wu Q. Zhu D. Efficient Biosynthesis of Ethyl (R)-3-Hydroxyglutarate through a One-Pot Bienzymatic Cascade of Halohydrin Dehalogenase and Nitrilase ChemCatChem 2015 7 9 1438 1444 10.1002/cctc.201500061
Lee S.-H. Park S. J. Lee S. Y. Hong S. H. Biosynthesis of enantiopure (S)-3-hydroxybutyric acid in metabolically engineered Escherichia coli Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2008 79 4 633 641 10.1007/s00253-008-1473-7 18461320
Itsuno, S. Enantioselective Reduction of Ketones. In Organic Reactions; Wiley, 1998; pp 395–576.
Zhong Z. Ye Y. Zhang Y. Du W. Hou Z. Alkali-Free Oxidation of 1,2-Propanediol to Lactic Acid over Intermetallic Cu1Pt Compounds Langmuir 2024 40 49 25882 25891 10.1021/acs.langmuir.4c03138 39588808
Jablonski P. Irgum K. Mikkola J.-P. Wärnå J. Khokarale S. G. Brønsted Acid Ionic Liquid Catalyzed Depolymerization of Poly-(3-hydroxybutyrate) to 3-Hydroxybutyric Acid: Highly Selective and Sustainable Transformation in Methyl Isobutyl Ketone and Water-Containing Phase-Separable Reaction Media ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2024 12 37 13946 13959 10.1021/acssuschemeng.4c04723
Zhao K. Tian G. Zheng Z. Chen J.-C. Chen G.-Q. Production of d-(−)-3-hydroxyalkanoic acid by recombinant Escherichia coli FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2003 218 1 59 64 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2003.tb11498.x 12583898
Martin C. H. Dhamankar H. Tseng H.-C. Sheppard M. J. Reisch C. R. Prather K. L. A platform pathway for production of 3-hydroxyacids provides a biosynthetic route to 3-hydroxy-γ-butyrolactone Nat. Commun. 2013 4 1 1414 10.1038/ncomms2418 23361005
Keiser L. S. Gatenil P. P. Zhu Y. Deng K. Waldburger L. Gin J. W. Chen Y. Baidoo E. E. K. Petzold C. J. Lanclos N. Engineering Polyketide Stereocenters with Ketoreductase Domain Exchanges J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025 147 42237 42252 10.1021/jacs.5c06736 41187963 PMC12636015
Yun E. J. Kwak S. Kim S. R. Park Y.-C. Jin Y.-S. Kim K. H. Production of (S)-3-hydroxybutyrate by metabolically engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae J. Biotechnol. 2015 209 23 30 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2015.05.017 26026703
Claassens N. J. Burgener S. Vögeli B. Erb T. J. Bar-Even A. A critical comparison of cellular and cell-free bioproduction systems Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2019 60 221 229 10.1016/j.copbio.2019.05.003 31207555 PMC7610769
Scheffen M. Marchal D. G. Beneyton T. Schuller S. K. Klose M. Diehl C. Lehmann J. Pfister P. Carrillo M. He H. A new-to-nature carboxylation module to improve natural and synthetic CO2 fixation Nat. Catal. 2021 4 2 105 115 10.1038/s41929-020-00557-y
Orrego A. H. Rubanu M. G. López I. L. Andrés-Sanz D. García-Marquina G. Pieslinger G. E. Salassa L. López-Gallego F. ATP-Independent and Cell-Free Biosynthesis of β-Hydroxy Acids Using Vinyl Esters as Smart Substrates Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2023 62 13 e202218312 10.1002/anie.202218312 36718873
Chen K. Arnold F. H. Engineering new catalytic activities in enzymes Nat. Catal. 2020 3 3 203 213 10.1038/s41929-019-0385-5
Emmanuel M. A. Bender S. G. Bilodeau C. Carceller J. M. DeHovitz J. S. Fu H. Liu Y. Nicholls B. T. Ouyang Y. Page C. G. Photobiocatalytic Strategies for Organic Synthesis Chem. Rev. 2023 123 9 5459 5520 10.1021/acs.chemrev.2c00767 37115521 PMC10905417
Rasor B. J. Vögeli B. Landwehr G. M. Bogart J. W. Karim A. S. Jewett M. C. Toward sustainable, cell-free biomanufacturing Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2021 69 136 144 10.1016/j.copbio.2020.12.012 33453438
Opgenorth P. H. Korman T. P. Bowie J. U. A synthetic biochemistry module for production of bio-based chemicals from glucose Nat. Chem. Biol. 2016 12 6 393 395 10.1038/nchembio.2062 27065234
Li F. Wei X. Zhang L. Liu C. You C. Zhu Z. Installing a Green Engine To Drive an Enzyme Cascade: A Light-Powered In Vitro Biosystem for Poly (3-hydroxybutyrate) Synthesis Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2022 134 1 e202111054 10.1002/anie.202111054 34664348
Karim A. S. Dudley Q. M. Juminaga A. Yuan Y. Crowe S. A. Heggestad J. T. Garg S. Abdalla T. Grubbe W. S. Rasor B. J. In vitro prototyping and rapid optimization of biosynthetic enzymes for cell design Nat. Chem. Biol. 2020 16 8 912 919 10.1038/s41589-020-0559-0 32541965
Thompson S. Mayerl F. Peoples O. P. Masamune S. Sinskey A. J. Walsh C. T. Mechanistic studies on.beta.-ketoacyl thiolase from Zoogloea ramigera: identification of the active-site nucleophile as Cys89, its mutation to Ser89, and kinetic and thermodynamic characterization of wild-type and mutant enzymes Biochemistry 1989 28 14 5735 5742 10.1021/bi00440a006 2775734
Liu H. Arbing M. A. Bowie J. U. Expanding the use of ethanol as a feedstock for cell-free synthetic biochemistry by implementing acetyl-CoA and ATP generating pathways Sci. Rep. 2022 12 1 7700 10.1038/s41598-022-11653-3 35546163 PMC9095697
Muñoz-Sánchez D. Carceller A. Álvaro G. Romero O. Guillén M. Artificial cell-free system for the sustainable production of acetoin from bioethanol Bioresour. Technol. 2025 419 132059 10.1016/j.biortech.2025.132059 39824322
Velasco-Lozano S. Santiago-Arcos J. Grazia Rubanu M. López-Gallego F. Cell-Free Biosynthesis of ω-Hydroxy Acids Boosted by a Synergistic Combination of Alcohol Dehydrogenases ChemSusChem 2022 15 9 e202200397 10.1002/cssc.202200397 35348296
Velasco-Lozano S. Santiago-Arcos J. Mayoral J. A. López-Gallego F. Co-immobilization and Colocalization of Multi-Enzyme Systems for the Cell-Free Biosynthesis of Aminoalcohols ChemCatChem 2020 12 11 3030 3041 10.1002/cctc.201902404
Zeballos N. Diamanti E. Benitez-Mateos A. I. Schmidt-Dannert C. Lopez-Gallego F. Solid-Phase Assembly of Multienzyme Systems into Artificial Cellulosomes Bioconjugate Chem. 2021 32 9 1966 1972 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.1c00327 34410702
Karim A. S. Jewett M. C. A cell-free framework for rapid biosynthetic pathway prototyping and enzyme discovery Metab. Eng. 2016 36 116 126 10.1016/j.ymben.2016.03.002 26996382
Opgenorth P. H. Korman T. P. Bowie J. U. A synthetic biochemistry molecular purge valve module that maintains redox balance Nat. Commun. 2014 5 4113 10.1038/ncomms5113 24936528
Kay J. E. Jewett M. C. A cell-free system for production of 2,3-butanediol is robust to growth-toxic compounds Metab. Eng. Commun. 2020 10 e00114 10.1016/j.mec.2019.e00114 31934547 PMC6951449
Khattak W. A. Ullah M. W. Ul-Islam M. Khan S. Kim M. Kim Y. Park J. K. Developmental strategies and regulation of cell-free enzyme system for ethanol production: a molecular prospective Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2014 98 23 9561 9578 10.1007/s00253-014-6154-0 25359472
Xue R. Woodley J. M. Process technology for multi-enzymatic reaction systems Bioresour. Technol. 2012 115 183 195 10.1016/j.biortech.2012.03.033 22531164
Santiago-Arcos J. Velasco-Lozano S. Diamanti E. Benítez-Mateos A. I. Grajales-Hernández D. Paradisi F. López-Gallego F. Optimized Spatial Configuration of Heterogeneous Biocatalysts Maximizes Cell-Free Biosynthesis of ω-Hydroxy and ω-Amino Acids ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2024 12 25 9474 9489 10.1021/acssuschemeng.4c02396 39280936 PMC11394354
Bolivar J. M. Woodley J. M. Fernandez-Lafuente R. Is enzyme immobilization a mature discipline? Some critical considerations to capitalize on the benefits of immobilization Chem. Soc. Rev. 2022 51 15 6251 6290 10.1039/D2CS00083K 35838107
Andrés-Sanz D. Maiz-Iginitz A. Bolivar J. M. Orrego A. H. Sardon H. López-Gallego F. Enantiodivergent biosynthesis of β-hydroxy esters by self-sufficient heterogeneous biocatalysts in a continuous flow Green Chem. 2024 26 8 4563 4573 10.1039/D4GC00369A
Benítez-Mateos A. I. Padrosa D. R. Paradisi F. Multistep enzyme cascades as a route towards green and sustainable pharmaceutical syntheses Nat. Chem. 2022 14 5 489 499 10.1038/s41557-022-00931-2 35513571
Altenburg W. J. Yewdall N. A. Vervoort D. F. M. van Stevendaal M. H. M. E. Mason A. F. van Hest J. C. M. Programmed spatial organization of biomacromolecules into discrete, coacervate-based protocells Nat. Commun. 2020 11 1 6282 10.1038/s41467-020-20124-0 33293610 PMC7722712
Liu F. Banta S. Chen W. Functional assembly of a multi-enzyme methanol oxidation cascade on a surface-displayed trifunctional scaffold for enhanced NADH production Chem. Commun. 2013 49 36 3766 3768 10.1039/c3cc40454d 23535691
Ellis G. A. Klein W. P. Lasarte-Aragonés G. Thakur M. Walper S. A. Medintz I. L. Artificial Multienzyme Scaffolds: Pursuing in Vitro Substrate Channeling with an Overview of Current Progress ACS Catal. 2019 9 12 10812 10869 10.1021/acscatal.9b02413
Roberts C. C. Chang C.-e. A. Modeling of Enhanced Catalysis in Multienzyme Nanostructures: Effect of Molecular Scaffolds, Spatial Organization, and Concentration J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2015 11 1 286 292 10.1021/ct5007482 26574226
Quin M. B. Wallin K. K. Zhang G. Schmidt-Dannert C. Spatial organization of multi-enzyme biocatalytic cascades Org. Biomol. Chem. 2017 15 20 4260 4271 10.1039/C7OB00391A 28374039
Diamanti E. Andrés-Sanz D. Orrego A. H. Carregal-Romero S. López-Gallego F. Surpassing Substrate–Enzyme Competition by Compartmentalization ACS Catal. 2023 13 17 11441 11454 10.1021/acscatal.3c01965
Grajales-Hernández D. A. Diamanti E. Moro R. Velasco-Lozano S. Pires E. López-Gallego F. Spatial Organization of Immobilized Multienzyme Systems Improves the Deracemization of Alkyl Glyceryl Ethers ACS Catal. 2023 13 23 15620 15632 10.1021/acscatal.3c02615
Diamanti E. Santiago-Arcos J. Grajales-Hernández D. Czarnievicz N. Comino N. Llarena I. Di Silvio D. Cortajarena A. L. López-Gallego F. Intraparticle Kinetics Unveil Crowding and Enzyme Distribution Effects on the Performance of Cofactor-Dependent Heterogeneous Biocatalysts ACS Catal. 2021 11 24 15051 15067 10.1021/acscatal.1c03760 34956691 PMC8689653
Thorpe T. W. Marshall J. R. Turner N. J. Multifunctional Biocatalysts for Organic Synthesis J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2024 146 12 7876 7884 10.1021/jacs.3c09542 38489244 PMC10979396
Kong W. Huang C. Zhou L. Gao J. Ma L. Liu Y. Jiang Y. Modularization of Immobilized Multienzyme Cascades for Continuous-Flow Enantioselective C–H Amination Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2024 63 37 e202407778 10.1002/anie.202407778 38871651
Bonfio C. Godino E. Corsini M. de Biani F. F. Guella G. Mansy S. S. Prebiotic iron–sulfur peptide catalysts generate a pH gradient across model membranes of late protocells Nat. Catal. 2018 1 8 616 623 10.1038/s41929-018-0116-3
Bobik T. A. Havemann G. D. Busch R. J. Williams D. S. Aldrich H. C. The Propanediol Utilization (pdu) Operon of Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium LT2 Includes Genes Necessary for Formation of Polyhedral Organelles Involved in Coenzyme B12-Dependent 1,2-Propanediol Degradation J. Bacteriol. 1999 181 19 5967 5975 10.1128/JB.181.19.5967-5975.1999 10498708 PMC103623
Lan E. I. Ro S. Y. Liao J. C. Oxygen-tolerant coenzyme A-acylating aldehyde dehydrogenase facilitates efficient photosynthetic n-butanol biosynthesis in cyanobacteria Energy Environ. Sci. 2013 6 9 2672 2681 10.1039/c3ee41405a
Fan C. Cheng S. Liu Y. Escobar C. M. Crowley C. S. Jefferson R. E. Yeates T. O. Bobik T. A. Short N-terminal sequences package proteins into bacterial microcompartments Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2010 107 16 7509 7514 10.1073/pnas.0913199107 20308536 PMC2867708
Tobimatsu T. Kawata M. Toraya T. The N-Terminal Regions of β and γ Subunits Lower the Solubility of Adenosylcobalamin-Dependent Diol Dehydratase Biosci., Biotechnol., Biochem. 2005 69 3 455 462 10.1271/bbb.69.455 15784971
Shibata N. Tamagaki H. Hieda N. Akita K. Komori H. Shomura Y. Terawaki S.-i. Mori K. Yasuoka N. Higuchi Y. Toraya T. Crystal Structures of Ethanolamine Ammonia-lyase Complexed with Coenzyme B12 Analogs and Substrates J. Biol. Chem. 2010 285 34 26484 26493 10.1074/jbc.M110.125112 20519496 PMC2924083
Kerfeld C. A. Erbilgin O. Bacterial microcompartments and the modular construction of microbial metabolism Trends Microbiol. 2015 23 1 22 34 10.1016/j.tim.2014.10.003 25455419
Yan R. T. Chen J. S. Coenzyme A-acylating aldehyde dehydrogenase from Clostridium beijerinckii NRRL B592 Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1990 56 9 2591 2599 10.1128/aem.56.9.2591-2599.1990 2275527 PMC184801
Sánchez L. B. Aldehyde Dehydrogenase (CoA-Acetylating) and the Mechanism of Ethanol Formation in the Amitochondriate Protist,Giardia lamblia Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 1998 354 1 57 64 10.1006/abbi.1998.0664 9633598
Tsuji K. Yoon K.-S. Ogo S. Biochemical characterization of a bifunctional acetaldehyde-alcohol dehydrogenase purified from a facultative anaerobic bacterium Citrobacter sp. S-77 J. Biosci. Bioeng. 2016 121 3 253 258 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2015.06.019 26216639
Palosaari N. R. Rogers P. Purification and properties of the inducible coenzyme A-linked butyraldehyde dehydrogenase from Clostridium acetobutylicum J. Bacteriol. 1988 170 7 2971 2976 10.1128/jb.170.7.2971-2976.1988 3384801 PMC211236
Getz E. B. Xiao M. Chakrabarty T. Cooke R. Selvin P. R. A Comparison between the Sulfhydryl Reductants Tris­(2-carboxyethyl)­phosphine and Dithiothreitol for Use in Protein Biochemistry Anal. Biochem. 1999 273 1 73 80 10.1006/abio.1999.4203 10452801
Catalano A. Mariconda A. D’Amato A. Iacopetta D. Ceramella J. Marra M. Saturnino C. Sinicropi M. S. Longo P. Aldehydes: What We Should Know About Them Organics 2024 5 4 395 428 10.3390/org5040021
Suchy L. Rudroff F. In situ Generation of Aldehydes for Subsequent Biocatalytic Cascade Reactions in Whole Cells ChemCatChem 2024 16 2 e202301138 10.1002/cctc.202301138
Smith, M. B. March’s Advanced Organic Chemistry: Reactions, Mechanisms, and Structure; John Wiley & Sons, 2025 10.1002/0470084960.
Flamholz A. Noor E. Bar-Even A. Milo R. eQuilibratorthe biochemical thermodynamics calculator Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 40 D1 D770 D775 10.1093/nar/gkr874 22064852 PMC3245061
Guo X. Feng Y. Wang X. Liu Y. Liu W. Li Q. Wang J. Xue S. Zhao Z. K. Characterization of the substrate scope of an alcohol dehydrogenase commonly used as methanol dehydrogenase Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2019 29 12 1446 1449 10.1016/j.bmcl.2019.04.025 31006524
Guagliardi A. Martino M. Iaccarino I. De Rosa M. Rossi M. Bartolucci S. Purification and characterization of the alcohol dehydrogenase from a novel strain of Bacillus stearothermophilus growing at 70 degrees C Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 1996 28 2 239 246 10.1016/1357-2725(95)00138-7 8729010
Santiago-Arcos J. Velasco-Lozano S. López-Gallego F. Multienzyme Coimmobilization on Triheterofunctional Supports Biomacromolecules 2023 24 2 929 942 10.1021/acs.biomac.2c01364 36649203 PMC10018741
Vázquez-Figueroa E. Chaparro-Riggers J. Bommarius A. S. Development of a Thermostable Glucose Dehydrogenase by a Structure-Guided Consensus Concept ChemBioChem 2007 8 18 2295 2301 10.1002/cbic.200700500 17990264
López I. L. Sánchez-Costa M. Orrego A. H. Zeballos N. Roura Padrosa D. López-Gallego F. Microtiter Plate Immobilization Screening for Prototyping Heterogeneous Enzyme Cascades Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2024 63 35 e202407411 10.1002/anie.202407411 39037386
Mateo C. Palomo J. M. Fuentes M. Betancor L. Grazu V. López-Gallego F. Pessela B. C. C. Hidalgo A. Fernández-Lorente G. Fernández-Lafuente R. Guisán J. M. Glyoxyl agarose: A fully inert and hydrophilic support for immobilization and high stabilization of proteins Enzyme Microb. Technol. 2006 39 2 274 280 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2005.10.014
Fernández-Lorente G. Lopez-Gallego F. Bolivar J. M. Rocha-Martin J. Moreno-Perez S. Guisan J. M. Immobilization of proteins on highly activated glyoxyl supports: Dramatic increase of the enzyme stability via multipoint immobilization on pre-existing carriers Curr. Org. Chem. 2015 19 17 1719 1731 10.2174/138527281917150806125708
Guisán J. Aldehyde-agarose gels as activated supports for immobilization-stabilization of enzymes Enzyme Microb. Technol. 1988 10 6 375 382 10.1016/0141-0229(88)90018-X
Wei X. Yang X. Hu C. Li Q. Liu Q. Wu Y. Xie L. Ning X. Li F. Cai T. ATP-free in vitro biotransformation of starch-derived maltodextrin into poly-3-hydroxybutyrate via acetyl-CoA Nat. Commun. 2024 15 1 3267 10.1038/s41467-024-46871-y 38627361 PMC11021460
Siedentop R. Dziennus M. Lütz S. Rosenthal K. Debottlenecking of an In Vitro Enzyme Cascade Using a Combined Model- and Experiment-Based Approach Chem. Ing. Technol. 2023 95 4 543 548 10.1002/cite.202200170
Bonk B. M. Tarasova Y. Hicks M. A. Tidor B. Prather K. L. J. Rational design of thiolase substrate specificity for metabolic engineering applications Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2018 115 9 2167 2182 10.1002/bit.26737 29877597 PMC6131064
Harijan R. K. Dalwani S. Kiema T.-R. Venkatesan R. Wierenga R. K. Thiolase: A Versatile Biocatalyst Employing Coenzyme A–Thioester Chemistry for Making and Breaking C–C Bonds Annu. Rev. Biochem. 2023 92 351 384 10.1146/annurev-biochem-052521-033746 37068769
Prier C. K. Soto K. C. Forstater J. H. Kuhl N. Kuethe J. T. Cheung-Lee W. L. Di Maso M. J. Eberle C. M. Grosser S. T. Ho H.-I. Amination of a Green Solvent via Immobilized Biocatalysis for the Synthesis of Nemtabrutinib ACS Catal. 2023 13 12 7707 7714 10.1021/acscatal.3c00941
Pandit A. V. Srinivasan S. Mahadevan R. Redesigning metabolism based on orthogonality principles Nat. Commun. 2017 8 1 15188 10.1038/ncomms15188 28555623 PMC5459945
Balola A. Ferreira S. Rocha I. From plastic waste to bioprocesses: Using ethylene glycol from polyethylene terephthalate biodegradation to fuel Escherichia coli metabolism and produce value-added compounds Metab. Eng. Commun. 2024 19 e00254 10.1016/j.mec.2024.e00254 39720189 PMC11667706
Dong H. Liffland S. Hillmyer M. A. Chang M. C. Y. Engineering in Vivo Production of α-Branched Polyesters J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019 141 42 16877 16883 10.1021/jacs.9b08585 31547647
Wang J. Shen X. Jain R. Wang J. Yuan Q. Yan Y. Establishing a novel biosynthetic pathway for the production of 3,4-dihydroxybutyric acid from xylose in Escherichia coli Metab. Eng. 2017 41 39 45 10.1016/j.ymben.2017.03.003 28342964
Walther T. Calvayrac F. Malbert Y. Alkim C. Dressaire C. Cordier H. François J. M. Construction of a synthetic metabolic pathway for the production of 2,4-dihydroxybutyric acid from homoserine Metab. Eng. 2018 45 237 245 10.1016/j.ymben.2017.12.005 29248755
de Jesús Mendoza-Pedroza J. Sánchez-Ramírez E. Segovia-Hernández J. G. Hernández S. Orjuela A. Recovery of alcohol industry wastes: Revaluation of fusel oil through intensified processes Chem. Eng. Process.:Process Intensif. 2021 163 108329 10.1016/j.cep.2021.108329
Meng D. Dai Y. Xu Y. Wu Y. Cui P. Zhu Z. Ma Y. Wang Y. Energy, economic and environmental evaluations for the separation of ethyl acetate/ethanol/water mixture via distillation and pervaporation unit Process Saf. Environ. Prot. 2020 140 14 25 10.1016/j.psep.2020.04.039
Hone C. A. Roberge D. M. Kappe C. O. The Use of Molecular Oxygen in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing: Is Flow the Way to Go? ChemSusChem 2017 10 1 32 41 10.1002/cssc.201601321 27863103
Hone, C. A. ; Kappe, C. O. The Use of Molecular Oxygen for Liquid Phase Aerobic Oxidations in Continuous Flow. In Accounts on Sustainable Flow Chemistry; Noël, T. ; Luque, R. , Eds.; Springer International Publishing, 2020; pp 67–110.
Zhao, D. ; Zhao, M. In On the Study of Packed Catalyst Bed Stresses for Outward Radial Flow Reactors, ASME 2020 Pressure Vessels & Piping Conference; ASME, 2020.
Holtmann D. Fraaije M. W. Arends I. W. C. E. Opperman D. J. Hollmann F. The taming of oxygen: biocatalytic oxyfunctionalisations Chem. Commun. 2014 50 87 13180 13200 10.1039/C3CC49747J 24902635
Ducrot L. López I. L. Orrego A. H. López-Gallego F. Coenzyme A Thioester Intermediates as Platform Molecules in Cell-Free Chemical Biomanufacturing ChemBioChem 2024 25 2 e202300673 10.1002/cbic.202300673 37994376
Walsh C. T. Polyketide and Nonribosomal Peptide Antibiotics: Modularity and Versatility Science 2004 303 5665 1805 1810 10.1126/science.1094318 15031493
Schnepel C. Pérez L. R. Yu Y. Angelastro A. Heath R. S. Lubberink M. Falcioni F. Mulholland K. Hayes M. A. Turner N. J. Flitsch S. L. Thioester-mediated biocatalytic amide bond synthesis with in situ thiol recycling Nat. Catal. 2023 6 1 89 99 10.1038/s41929-022-00889-x
Hoops S. Sahle S. Gauges R. Lee C. Pahle J. Simus N. Singhal M. Xu L. Mendes P. Kummer U. COPASIa COmplex PAthway SImulator Bioinformatics 2006 22 24 3067 3074 10.1093/bioinformatics/btl485 17032683
Beber M. E. Gollub M. G. Mozaffari D. Shebek K. M. Flamholz A. I. Milo R. Noor E. eQuilibrator 3.0: a database solution for thermodynamic constant estimation Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 50 D603 D609 10.1093/nar/gkab1106 PMC8728285 34850162
Schindelin J. Arganda-Carreras I. Frise E. Kaynig V. Longair M. Pietzsch T. Preibisch S. Rueden C. Saalfeld S. Schmid B. Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis Nat. Methods 2012 9 7 676 682 10.1038/nmeth.2019 22743772 PMC3855844
