Targeting iNOS and associated proteins in neutrophils: An in-silico and ex-vivo approach for anti-sepsis therapy.

Previous reports from the lab have demonstrated the role of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)
and associated proteins in sepsis-induced neutrophilic hyperinflammation. This study aimed to
identify FDA-approved drugs that inhibit iNOS and associated proteins to attenuate neutrophil-
induced excessive inflammation. An in-silico approach involving STRING and Cytoscape was used to map
protein-protein interactions (PPI). The FDA-approved drugs that target these proteins were retrieved
from DrugBank. Candidate drugs were identified from the DrugBank database using a target sequence of
iNOS and associated proteins. The human iNOS and associated proteins were investigated for
interacting partners using the STRING database (highest confidence >0.90). The UCSF Chimera and
Discovery Studio were used to perform molecular docking and Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation to
evaluate drug binding affinities. Thirty sepsis patients and twenty healthy volunteers were
enrolled. The effect of high-scoring candidate drugs was assessed under an ex-vivo model by
isolating neutrophils from sepsis patients and healthy volunteers. Levels of reactive oxygen species
(ROS), nitric oxide (NO), neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) and phospho-p38MAPK activity
following Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, and LPS
stimulation in the presence or absence of candidate drugs were also evaluated. The result of the PPI
network was developed by using the Cytoscape plugin. The molecular docking and MD simulation
analysis showed that dexamethasone and curcumin have high binding affinities to iNOS and associated
proteins. Ex-vivo studies showed that neutrophils from sepsis patients had elevated ROS, NO, NET,
and phospho-p38MAPK levels, which were significantly attenuated by dexamethasone + curcumin
treatment (p < 0.01 for ROS, NO, and NET; p < 0.001 for phospho-p38MAPK). Results obtained from in
silico and ex-vivo studies showed that dexamethasone and curcumin have the potential to inhibit
neutrophilic functions attributed to iNOS and associated proteins. These findings support their
potential for repurposing as targeted immunomodulatory therapies in sepsis management.