In-Plant Validation of Postharvest Water Sanitation Practices to Prevent Cross-Contamination in Michigan Commercial Apple Packinghouses.

Recirculated postharvest water systems play a critical role in produce packinghouse operations but
are also recognized as potential points for microbial cross-contamination. To evaluate the
effectiveness of current commercial practices, an in-plant validation study was conducted across
three Michigan apple packinghouses during routine operations. Microbial [aerobic plate count (APC),
Enterobacteriaceae (EB), total coliforms (TC), and generic Escherichia coli (EC)] and
physicochemical (turbidity, pH, temperature, and sanitizer concentration) parameters were monitored
in flume water (159 samples) and on apples (255 samples) over water hold times of up to 80 h.
Microbial levels in flume water and on apples were plated onto Petrifilm. Differences in
physicochemical parameters and indicator concentrations by location and time were assessed for both
water and apples. Flume systems exhibited considerable variability in sanitizer concentrations
relative to targets (e.g., Packinghouse A peroxyacetic acid target 75 ppm, ranged 15-180 ppm, mean
69.1 ± 48.8 ppm) and consistent increases in turbidity over time (e.g., Packinghouse B: 18.3 NTU at
0 h to 52.4 NTU at 55.5 h). Generic E. coli was infrequently detected [4/255 (1.6%) apples and 2/159
(1.3%) water samples], limiting its utility as an indicator for postharvest water quality in these
apple systems. APC, EB, and TC levels in both water and on apples were consistently lower in
Packinghouse C compared to Packinghouses A and B. No statistically significant differences in APC
(5.04 log CFU/apple; p = 0.06 - 0.60), EB (3.47 log CFU/apple; p = 0.06 - 0.37), or TC (3.34 log
CFU/apple; 0.32 - 0.48) levels were observed on apples before and after flume systems, indicating
that cross-contamination was effectively managed. Microbial reductions were not achieved, further
supporting that postharvest washing, even with sanitizers, should not be considered a reduction
step. Commercial operating conditions in studied apple packinghouses were sufficient to prevent
cross-contamination. Individual packinghouse should validate their systems to understand
effectiveness of postharvest water management as a process control.